.. raw:: html

   <a id="hearing-link" href="https://lampardinquiry.org.uk/hearings/hearing-day-19-april-hearing/">Official hearing page</a>

Hearing Day 19 – Milind Karale
==============================

.. raw:: html

   <details id="hearing-meta" open>
        <summary>
            <span class="open">Hide video</span>
            <span class="closed">Show video</span>
        </summary>
   <lite-youtube videoid="veRe4vtHRjA" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   <lite-youtube videoid="rFTJRAq5Bm8" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   </details>

*(10.04 am)*

**The Chair**: Good morning, Dr Karale.

Ms Harris.

**Ms Harris**: Good morning, Chair.

This morning the Inquiry will be hearing again from Dr Karale and this time he will speak to his second witness statement.    Dr Karale's second witness statement is in response to a request sent by the Inquiry for an overview of the inpatient pathway and for certain key features of that pathway.

The evidence will deal, in a broad sense, with matters from admission to discharge and it will touch on specific issues, for example admission assessments, medication, restrictive practices, involvement of family, and so on.

This afternoon, a member of the Counsel to the Inquiry team will present three short summaries to you covering other evidence that the Inquiry has received so far.     Those summaries will cover the evidence received so far from NHS England, from the Department of Health and Social Care and from mental health charities.     There may be aspects of today's evidence that are difficult to listen to.

For some people, it may not be possible to sit through the two sessions and, as with other days, anyone in the Inquiry room should feel free to leave at any time.

May I take this opportunity again to remind those engaging with the Inquiry that emotional support is available for all who require it, the well-being of those participating in the Inquiry is extremely important to the Inquiry.    We have present here again today emotional support staff from Hestia, an experienced provider of emotional support in these types of hearings and I think they are currently in the room.   They can be identified by their orange-coloured scarves.   There is a private room here where anyone who needs emotional support can talk to the Hestia support staff or, if you prefer, you can speak to a member of the Inquiry team and we will put you in touch with the emotional support staff.     We are all wearing purple-coloured lanyards.

For those following this hearing online, information about the emotional support that is available can be found on the Lampard Inquiry website at lampardinquiry.org.uk and the "Support" tab is near the top right-hand corner.   We want everyone engaging with this Inquiry in whatever way to feel safe and supported.

Chair, I will now turn to questions of Dr Karale who you will see is at the witness table waiting.    He is still under oath from yesterday and therefore does not need to be sworn again.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you very much.

Dr Milind Karale
----------------

*DR MILIND KARALE (continued).*

Questioned by Ms Harris (continued)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Ms Harris**: Dr Karale, you are still under oath and remain under oath, having been sworn in yesterday.     I won't go through all the preliminaries again, therefore.    But can you just state your full name again for the record, please.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Milind Ramkrishna Karale.

**Ms Harris**: We won't go through your roles and responsibilities again as you provided them yesterday and they are also set out within your second witness statement in addition?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right.

**Ms Harris**: We also heard yesterday that you are a consultant psychiatrist, although your role is much more now a managerial one.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: We also know that you have been working with the Trust and its predecessor since 2012 --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- and you have remained with EPUT after the merger of

SEPT and NEPT in 2017?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: You provided a second witness statement on behalf of

EPUT in response to requests for evidence from the

Inquiry?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right.

**Ms Harris**: For those following by way of electronic documentation,

that statement begins at page 1096 of the core bundle

provided for this hearing -- disclosed for this hearing.

Do you have a copy of that statement in front of

you?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I do.

**Ms Harris**: It's dated 26 March 2025; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: It is 127 pages long?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: I think it contains some 594 paragraphs.   If we turn to

the last page of the statement, which, for the record,

is page 1222 of the core bundle, we can see you made

a statement of truth and you signed the witness

statement.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: I think there may be two or three minor corrections you

have indicated you may wish to make to that statement. Can I deal with it this way: please identify those when we go through the evidence and identify where they are and we can correct the record accordingly.

If we don't touch on them, I will ask you to remind me at the end and we will ensure that your statement is as you wish it to be before it is published.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Thank you.

**Ms Harris**: Subject to those alterations that may be made, do you ask that this statement be taken as your evidence to the Inquiry at this stage --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: -- further to the evidence that you confirmed and provided yesterday?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: For the record, that statement will form part of the material for the Inquiry's consideration.    You also provided multiple exhibits --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- with this statement: over 200 in fact?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: The documents which you provided you rely upon to support or illustrate points that you made in your witness statement --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- or in order to respond to the request for documentation, which I will come to in a moment?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: By way of background, again, you will recall, and we said yesterday, that on Thursday the Inquiry heard expert evidence from Dr Davidson and Maria Nelligan about standards of practice in mental health care and some of the challenges in delivery of that care.

My aim today is to ask you about the practice of EPUT and its predecessors in delivering inpatient care and treatment to Essex patients over the relevant period.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: Again, by way of introduction, this is an introductory hearing.    I am not going to be asking you about specific failings in care.   You have not been and I will come back to this in a moment, for example, asked to produce data on where services fell short, or anything of that nature for this statement; that's right, isn't it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, yes.

**Ms Harris**: You were asked to provide a description of the mental health treatment and care that the Trust delivered --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- yes -- identification of the key policy or documentation that underpinned the service --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- an explanation of how the Trust monitored and evaluated performance --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- and I'll come back to that in a moment, as in how you checked whether the service was being delivered as intended; and you were asked to provide an overview of the records that would exist to show the outcome of that monitoring and evaluation?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: In short, the Inquiry asked for a broad explanation of the systems and processes involved.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: I am going to begin by asking you some or asking some general questions.   Like yesterday, when we go through your evidence, please can you make clear, as appropriate, when you are describing something that should have happened, as opposed to something that actually happened, to your knowledge?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.    Yes.

**Ms Harris**: As in can we try and identify today where things described are aspirational or may be described as aspirational.

At paragraph 8 of your witness statement, you say this:

"While I have done my best in the time available" --

**The Chair**: Ms Harris, Dr Karale --

**Ms Harris**: Sorry.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Can I just say: things should happen and that is what's -- rather than aspirational and certain things haven't happened, that's something that's different.     So there are some standards or expectations in the organisation that doesn't happen; it's different to aspiration, so I just want to make sure that distinction.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you.   When we get to various paragraphs in your witness statement, I will ask you to make clear whether that's something that you say should be happening or something that you know was happening in practice.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right, thank you.

**Ms Harris**: All right.   I was just, I think -- I hope -- picking up from what you said yesterday, reminding you that in this statement, you have also said, at paragraph 8, that you have done your best to address the issues but there are others who might be better placed to provide more detail concerning the pre-EPUT period?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Would you accept, as a general point, that your statement -- and this may be the reason -- is relatively limited in description of what I might call historical matters, matters that happened in the earlier part of the relevant period?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: It is largely focused, I think, on the current position and the forward-looking position --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- of EPUT.   In fact, it's right that many of the documents you have provided are policies and exhibits which are recently produced: 2023, 2024 and I think even 2025?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: In places, I am going to ask you to provide greater clarity about certain measures but, if you cannot provide answers today, would you undertake to return at a later date to provide that information?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I will.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask you about the policies, EPUT's policy library, for want of a better expression, and access to policy.

Just using some examples, before we get to the body of your statement, I would like to ask you about some of the documents you have provided.   Now, the Inquiry understands that what you have provided is what might be called a corporate statement, you have made it on behalf of EPUT.   But the Inquiry would like to understand how various documents were selected and how the Trust approached the task of identifying what was selected and provided to the Inquiry to use for the statement and to attach to it.

So can I ask you about one or two.

At paragraph 262 in your statement, and this is just focusing on the documentation, you produce a version of the Safety Management Procedure, which is exhibit MK2-148.

Could we put that up, please.     There might be a slight delay.    There we go.   I am not sure if we can see the top of the page.

We can see, and I appreciate this is a procedure, that the "Clinical Risk Assessment and Safety Management Procedure", if we look at the review date or we look at the implementation date was 1 July, the last review date was 17 March 2017, with the next review date being October 2019.

I am not going -- I will actually.

In your statement for yesterday, you produced MK-15. Can I ask that that be put up, please.    I appreciate there may be a slight delay as we change bundles.

This is the "Clinical Risk Assessment and Management Policy".   I appreciate that we looked at a procedure before, this is the policy, and this one has a last review date of 14 February 2025 and a next review date of December.    The question I am asking you -- sorry to be complicated in arriving at it -- is: does this document not replace or supersede, or this set of documents, replace the documents from 2017 to be reviewed in 2019?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: If it is the same policy then it should supersede the previous policy.

**Ms Harris**: I appreciate that this, as I say, is a policy and the other one was a procedure.     The two usually come together, don't they?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They do --

**Ms Harris**: But it looks like there is a more recent version of MK2-148 that we haven't got?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Chair, I have relied on the organisation to provide these exhibits.     I will go back to the organisation and see whether those documents are there and could be provided to the Inquiry team.

**Ms Harris**: Another question I wanted to ask you about was whether or not documents have been provided in draft form.    Can you help us with this.    If we look at your statement at paragraph 56(h), and I am not asking you about the evidence, per se, but I will put it into context.     You are talking about medical assessment and clerking and what it will include.    At (h) you say it will include to:

"Agree an initial engagement and observation plan with the patient ..."

Do you see that at 56(h)?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, I do.

**Ms Harris**: I think we have now got it up, thank you very much Amanda.

You produce, in that regard, MK2-24 and MK2-25, which relate to the electronic systems.     Can we just have a brief look at those, please.

I think 24 is at our exhibits bundle at 1075.    There is MK-24.    Do you see in "Parent Policy/Clinical Guideline", there are some Xs and in "Ratification group(s)" there are some Xs?      Is this in draft form, do you think?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is likely to be in the draft form.

**Ms Harris**: Yes.   Can we have a look, please, at MK-25, as well, which is at 1087 of the same bundle.     I think this is even more apparently in draft form, this is MK-25. Putting aside the document and what it's about for a moment, we can see the Xs and we have got in highlight "Add date", even though the approval group committee date, I think, on both of the front pages of these documents is 23 November 2023.

That looks to be a draft document as well, doesn't it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It does.

**Ms Harris**: Can you help us?   Have these documents come out of draft form, have they been ratified or implemented?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So my understanding is that, first, the Trust is trying to get a number of these documents on an electronic platform called SOPHIA and they are in the process of moving a number of these documents so that they are easily accessible to staff.   I also understand that, until a new policy has been ratified, the existing -- the previous policy, even if it is out of date, continues to be the current policy for -- procedure for the clinicians.

**Ms Harris**: Can I just ask you about that because you have mentioned staff, because obviously the importance of this documentation is that staff can access it and see what it says and how they need to conduct their practice.

So, at the moment, you are saying that these appear to be on the system in draft form, have I understood that correctly?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: So how would staff know what they are looking for or looking at?    Would they find this or would they find the old version?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So, if the staff -- when staff want to access a policy, there is, on the Trust intranet, a section for policies and procedures, and they would go on that website and type whatever policy they're wanting -- if they want to know about disengagement that's the word they would -- and the relevant policy will come up.   But -- and they would -- they would follow that policy.

**Ms Harris**: If they were looking for this, what would they get: would they get the draft form here or would they get the old version?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I am not certain from where this policy has been obtained, whether it's from the intranet or --

**Ms Harris**: But --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: -- from ...

**Ms Harris**: -- you acknowledge, do you, and accept that the Inquiry appears to have been provided with draft documents in support of your statement?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: There are other examples, which I won't go to, but I think one of them was in relation to Larkwood but there are a number, I think, within the bundle.

As we have already outlined, in the Rule 9 request the Inquiry specifically sought copies of current policies and relevant documentation, and for a comprehensive list of all the relevant documents from the relevant period with changes identified.

Now, I appreciate what you have written, I think, at your paragraph 8 about timing, but do you think it will be possible for EPUT to provide this comprehensive list of documentation to the Inquiry at some point?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Chair, I will have to go back to the organisation.    I'm probably not best placed to give an idea about the policies and procedures and the documents.

**The Chair**: You would be able to let us know what staff would actually see if they went on to the intranet?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I will, Chair.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Harris**: Really, as I said in my preamble to this section, the Inquiry, I think, needs to understand the state of EPUT's library --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: -- and what it looks like.

Can I just, on that note, make reference to monitoring and compliance.   We touched on this yesterday.   In the Rule 9 requests that were sent in relation to both pre-admission assessments and the inpatient pathway, EPUT was asked to explain, in relation to various aspects, in fact all of the components, how it evaluated and monitored practice and compliance; do you recall that request?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: (The witness nodded)

**Ms Harris**: You are nodding.   I think for the transcript you have to say yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, sorry.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you.    The Trust was also, as you say, asked to identify the documents and records that formed that monitoring and evaluation.    Now, for the record, you give that matter some attention at paragraphs 205 to 213 of your first statement and at 400 to 409 of your second statement, but the response is limited.

Again, for the record, as you know, this is an area of particular interest to the Inquiry and its participants and it's going to be important for the Inquiry to obtain a systematic and comprehensive explanation of how practice was monitored throughout the period and an understanding of the records that exist for that monitoring, what is available for the Inquiry's scrutiny, in effect.

So therefore, given limited response in your statements, the Inquiry will send further requests for fuller and better information.

Do you agree or can you agree, on behalf of EPUT, that additional information will be provided in due course when requested on this topic, on monitoring and evaluation?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, Chair.    I am not probably the best person around the monitoring and the governance arrangements of the organisation but I will take it back to the organisation.

**Ms Harris**: I was going to ask if you would undertake to return to give evidence on the matter, but I think what you are saying is that EPUT may need to identify someone better placed to give evidence about monitoring and evaluation than you and your role; is that what you are saying?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, yes.

**Ms Harris**: All right.   Can I move then onto Pathway and begin with pre-admission and the Urgent Care Pathway.   Now, I am not going to go back over what we heard yesterday.   We have already heard evidence about pre-admission assessments.    But I think you pick this up at paragraph 44 of your witness statement.

At 44, you say:

"Inpatient admissions into EPUT services do not follow a single point of entry, and the processes vary across the specialities, as outlined individually within the statement.   However, a common principle across all of the services is that some form of assessment is undertaken prior to admission.    The assessment includes a review of their records, where possible, to gather information from any prior assessments and care plans and to identify any advanced choices.   Patient's wishes, wherever possible, should be considered when determining whether hospital admission is appropriate, including admissions under the Mental Health Act."

I think we then need to jump ahead to your paragraph 526, where you are dealing with adults and older adults, and you say:

"For informal admissions, patients will be assessed by the clinical teams in the community and a decision made whether enhanced community provision can be offered and whether admission is necessary.   If admission is required, appropriate gatekeeping teams in the Urgent Care Pathway, such as Crisis Resolution Home Treatment Teams, Crisis Response Teams, Urgent Care Department and Dementia Intensive Service/Team (for patients with dementia/frailty) will be contacted."

You go on to say at 527 -- thank you, Amanda:

"For patients requiring formal admissions (ie under the Mental Health Act), assessments are completed by the Local Authority Approved Mental Health Professionals (AMHPs) and Section 12 approved doctors.   AMHPs are mental health professionals who have been approved by a local social services authority to carry out certain duties under the MHA."

You go on to say how AMHP services transferred into the local authority between 2018 and 2019.   There is obviously there a difference between informal and formal.

Paragraph 528, I think you are still referring to formal admission:

"When a decision is made that a patient requires admission, a request is made for the bed, specifying the type of bed that is required."

You go on to talk about under the Mental Health Act.

At paragraph 529, you talk about the Urgent Care Pathway:

"The Urgent Care Pathway is for crises and the Crises Response Team (CRS) provide a four-hour response. The Crises home team and Accident and Emergency (A&E) liaison team have a policy [which you reference] for the 24-hour response.   This is currently being reviewed alongside the three Integrated Care Boards for the entirety of the Urgent Care Pathway."

Can you explain, shortly, please, then, in that context, the Urgent Care Pathway and the function of the Urgent Care Department?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.   The Urgent Care Pathway has evolved over a period of time.   It involves the pathway for patients needing inpatient treatment.   So these are patients who are in crisis and there are a number of services which they can access to receive inpatient treatment.   So that's the Urgent Care Pathway.

.. rst-class:: indented

The urgent -- the crisis teams are predominantly the main teams initially to bring the patients in and informal patients are admitted to an assessment unit. The idea was that, instead of relying on a single assessment in the middle of the night by a nurse or a trainee doctor, let's bring the patient in to an assessment unit where more time can be spent in gathering information.   A senior person, a consultant, can make a decision whether the patient should be admitted or should be discharged, and that was the idea of assessment units.

.. rst-class:: indented

We realised with time that, once a patient stays overnight, there was a tendency to keep these patients for a longer period and that was, in a way, blocking and causing some bed pressures.   So the idea of can we assess these patients without having -- keeping them overnight and also to see that patients -- psychiatric patients don't have to wait in general hospital A&Es for a long period, their experience is different there, those are busy A&Es, you often have to wait, can we provide our own A&E which is calm, purpose built, which will cater to the needs of these patients and that led to the development of Urgent Care Department or -- in Basildon.

.. rst-class:: indented

We now asked to build two more -- set of two more Urgent Care Departments in Essex.   So that's the overall sort of Urgent Care Pathway.

**Ms Harris**: You deal at paragraphs 529 and 530 with the response times, the various timing of responses, which is four hours for the CRS, 24 hours for the CRHT and liaison and 24 hours for the Urgent Care Department.

Can you explain those response times for those needing assessment or the rationale for those response times?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So, as I mentioned yesterday, the Crisis Response Team will use a tool to decide how urgent the assessment is and the four hour refers to a particular section, Section B, where you require a response within that specific time.

.. rst-class:: indented

The crisis team for home treatment is for patients who are in the community and they would ring the patient and arrange an assessment in 24 hours.     Sometimes -- and it is taking into consideration patients' convenience as well.    Sometimes when patients are acutely unwell, they are with their relatives or they are looked after by somebody else, so it is arranging that time within the -- within that period to assess those patients.

.. rst-class:: indented

A&E -- when mental Urgent Care Department patients are triaged, as soon as they come in, like any other A&E, the 12-hour period is we aim not to keep the patient in Urgent Care Department for more than 12 hours.

**Ms Harris**: Moving on to a slightly different topic and it's about access to records.

Amanda, could we put up paragraph 44 again, please, which is page 110 of the statement bundle.

We are back here talking about the admission assessment at paragraph 44.    In the middle of the paragraph, you say:

"The assessment includes a review of their records, where possible, to gather information from any prior assessments and care plans and to identify any advance choices."

I have already read out the rest of that.     What records are reviewed; what are you referring to at pre-admission assessment?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is a common clinical practice: before you see a patient, you try to gather as much information on the patient as possible and this is the electronic record. If a patient is known to the services and has presented again, we would expect the clinicians to familiarise themselves with the previous clinical presentations, so that they don't have to ask the same information again.

.. rst-class:: indented

It also gives them an indication of what the likely presentation is going to be.

**Ms Harris**: What about if they are not known to the service, for example, or not had any significant prior history, what are the expectations on staff to gather and review information for these pre-admission assessments?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: If it's a new patient, it's -- as I mentioned, the first attempt would be to contact the patient and to arrange for crisis teams to arrange, and if a patient is willing and happy for the clinician to contact the family to gather more information, there would be an expectation that they gather that relevant information from the family.

.. rst-class:: indented

Most of the times, patients are accompanied by family members and the clinicians would talk to the families to obtain the objective information.   In A&E, many times patients do come in -- Urgent Care Department, do come with family members are brought in by family members and that forms the part of a routine regular assessment.

**Ms Harris**: You use the words "where possible".   When might it not be possible to review records or get prior information?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: If there are no records or if the patient does not have a family member, comes alone.   We look after homeless patients as well, many times they don't have anyone to look after them.

.. rst-class:: indented

So it depends on whatever is available.

**Ms Harris**: In paragraph 45, you refer to advance statements, and I am not asking for that to be put up, but you say:

"Some patients may have made an advance statement while well, outlining how they wish to be treated in the event of a dispute episode of mental [unwellness]."

We have and you have produced -- can we look at it very quickly, please -- as your MK2-10, a leaflet, I think, dated 2022 about this.   Yes.    I won't ask for us to go through it but identifying it there with that exhibit.   As I say this is dated 2022.    How long have EPUT had leaflets that they have provided to patients in order to encourage advance statements?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I cannot say specifically about the advance statements. The organisation has had patient information leaflets for a long time.   I remember even in South Essex Partnership Trust, when patients were admitted they would have a patient information pack.

**Ms Harris**: We will come back to the information packs in a moment. What about these advance statements: how long have patients been provided information about those?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I will have to get back to you on that.

**Ms Harris**: When in the process do the patients make those advance statements; when are they invited to make those?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So when they are well, either through their community mental health team and when patients are admitted, when they recover, that information is there in the information pack, so they can make advance statements for their subsequent treatment.

**Ms Harris**: I would like to move on to bed management, please.     I am dealing with topics and, in particular, I would like to ask you about single and mixed-sex wards which you deal with in your statement.      Now, just by way of background, you may be aware the Inquiry had a presentation last week which incorporated EPUT's response to a different Rule 9 request, I think which you reference in your statement, which asked for information about the mental health services it provided, the locations and for some information about wards, and the change in mixed-sex and single wards.

Can we have a look, please, at your table at paragraph 28 of your witness statement.     We will not read it but let's have a look at it.     This is Table 3, it starts and goes over the page, and what you have done in this table, and we can see and I will say it for the record, we won't go through it, is you have set out the speciality, the bed numbers, the number of wards and whether they are mixed-sex or single-sex.      So we see it starts there and, I think, goes over the page, and then, I think, further down.

I think we can see that most of the acute adult wards are single sex.     Mental Health Assessment Units are mixed; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Most of your older adult wards are mixed-sex?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: All but one of your secure wards are single-sex?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: All CAMHS wards are mixed?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: I think did you want to make a correction in relation to

your paragraph 31.   Could we expand paragraph 31,

please, Amanda?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There is an error on the table as well.

**Ms Harris**: Do you want to tell us where the error was on the table

please, Dr Karale?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It says on page 10, second column, two wards of

.. rst-class:: indented

mixed-sex adult wards; there is only one --

**Ms Harris**: Sorry, where is --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: On page 10, on second line, where it says 6 --

**Ms Harris**: In low secure?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: No, that's a page before.

**The Chair**: 106, you are referring to?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It starts with 36, sorry, that's the one where it says

.. rst-class:: indented

"2 wards", "Adults of working age mixed-sex wards".

**Ms Harris**: So it is the top of 1105.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: "Adults of working age mixed-sex wards across Chelmsford

.. rst-class:: indented

and Colchester."

**Ms Harris**: Those two wards.    What should the correction be?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There would be only one ward, which is a mixed-sex ward.

**Ms Harris**: Okay.     Then going back to paragraph 31 of your statement then, please.     Did you want to make a correction in 31?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.    As you stated, the old-age wards are mixed-sex wards.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask you about gender.    At paragraph 31, you set out that gender can influence a bed placement for a patient.    I would like to understand what you meant when you referred to "gender".

You have mixed-sex wards, we know, but I want to ask you about gender.    Specifically, how does EPUT deal practically with patients who identify as a different gender to that they were assigned at birth?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There is a policy for treating such patients -- these patients.     On a clinical and practical level, the staff would ask the person what their identified gender is. They would then -- and what the preferred place of treatment would be.

.. rst-class:: indented

They would try to -- they would then undertake a risk assessment as to how safe it is to manage that person on that particular -- on their ward of choice, and it may mean that they might have to be on a one-to-one observation for a period of time, based on the risk, so that's how practically the staff would manage --

**Ms Harris**: Could I just --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: -- and provide treatment.

**Ms Harris**: -- pause you.    This is perhaps an example where you say "They would, they would, they would".   Are you aware of that happening in practice?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I have spoken to colleagues about it.   I understand the Trust policy is on similar lines.

**Ms Harris**: That's a policy that you could provide to the Inquiry?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, we should be able to.

**Ms Harris**: How does the Trust accommodate gender non-binary patients; is it the same?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The principles would be the same.   Patient choice, patient preference and a risk assessment.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask you about sexual safety, which is at your paragraph 32.    Can we look at paragraph 32, please.

You say that:

"Consultation took place with Consultant Psychiatrists to agree on responsibility for the patient wards, along with the multi-disciplinary team.    Some wards remained mixed sex where changes were not feasible due to the location and availability of showers and toilets.    In such cases, the wards implemented guidance on maintaining dignity, respect and sexual safety."

You go on to deal with some of the measures that were implemented, which refers to sexual safety on mixed wards.   It continues that they:

"... included the use of female-only lounges and swing rooms.   Swing room is the term used to describe a hospital bed that can switch from a male to a female room to accommodate either sex for an admission on the ward during busy periods."

So can you explain, please, for the Inquiry how are patients of different sex accommodated in mixed-sex wards: what are the arrangements?    What happens with the bathrooms and the recreational rooms, and so on?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So on a mixed-sex ward, there would be gender segregation, there were wings and those -- there is a female -- there would be a female wing and a male wing.    Females would be -- males would not be allowed in the female wing.   Their rooms, their toilets, would be in that -- on that wing and, likewise, there would be a male wing for male patients.     So that's the gender segregation and --

**Ms Harris**: Are the recreational rooms separate or are they shared?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Recreation rooms are separate.

**Ms Harris**: So how do the swing rooms work then in that context; where are they?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So there would be a door for the entrance of the female wing, and there will be a male wing, a door, and there are certain rooms which are in between where the boundary of a female wing or a male wing can be changed, depending upon the need of, at the time.

**Ms Harris**: Why do you say they make a ward safer?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The swing beds do not necessarily make the ward safer --

**Ms Harris**: Or the arrangements?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Because the males are not allowed to, it's not -- I wouldn't use the word safe.   It is safer, compared to having mixed-sex wards -- sorry, single-sex wards but the males are not allowed to enter the female corridor, and vice versa.

**Ms Harris**: Do you agree that sexual safety can be an issue equally on a single-sex ward?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It can be.   Especially when manic patients are disinhibited and, therefore, level of observations for such patients are important.

**Ms Harris**: In terms of staffing, is there an expectation that female-only wards will not be staffed by male ward staff?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I am not aware of such expectation.

**Ms Harris**: Okay.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It would be difficult to -- I mean, there's -- recruitment is itself a challenge, at present.

**Ms Harris**: Moving a little bit to bed management then, please -- and paragraph 33, please, Amanda, of the statement, which I think is 1107, thank you very much.

We see that:

"Decisions regarding the selection of bed type and ward for admission is dependent on a number of factors, including age of the patient, severity of the presentation and the application of the [Mental Health Act].    This decision is made pre-admission by the referral sources and, depending on the service, agreed through the appropriate bed allocation system."

So it's the referral sources, not the inpatient units themselves that make the decision on bed type. Can you explain this, please?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the crisis -- I will give you an example, a crisis team has gone in to assess a patient and decided the patient needs admission.    If it is an informal admission, they would decide the patient goes to an assessment unit.   If it's -- if the patient comes after following an assessment under the Mental Health Act but goes straightaway to treatment, so that a distinction between where the patient goes.

.. rst-class:: indented

If a patient is, is quite -- very, very unwell, very aggressive and needs more containment, the referral would decide patient needs to go to psychiatric intensive care unit rather than a general ward, and so forth.

.. rst-class:: indented

So that there is some, a decision made at the time of the assessment as the most suitable place.    Obviously they will try to treat the patient closest to their home in an area which is familiar to the patient.    But, based on the type of the wards, mother and babies would -- obviously would go to a mother and baby unit, and so forth.

**Ms Harris**: You make reference to the collaborative admission process.   What's that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So 2021, the specialist bed -- certain beds, certain areas see forensic beds, child and adult mental health beds, mother and baby beds.    They were initially -- they were initially managed by NHS England.    There were then collaborators -- providers were asked to set up collaboratives and these collaboratives then managed the beds regionally.    So, for example, EPUT is the lead for forensic beds.

.. rst-class:: indented

So if a patient -- forensic patient requires a bed, there is a national process -- they would make -- a request would be made to the collaborator; collaborator would then send a referral to the local forensic services, who would then undertake a gatekeeping assessment.    Likewise, for mother and baby unit, the decision -- there are about 16 mother and baby units nationally.    A patient can be placed anywhere based on the availability.   But the initial intention would be to place the patient in a local mother and baby unit.

.. rst-class:: indented

So these are beds managed regionally or nationally, rather than by a Trust.

**Ms Harris**: Can we go back to your statement, please, at paragraphs 36 and 37, which I hope will still be nearby, 1108, and just deal with this really briefly in light of a new document that's been provided.

At paragraph 36, you indicate that:

"EPUT currently operates a Capacity, Flow and Escalation Protocol designed to support a consistent approach across adult services in EPUT ..."

It is right to say, and we see reference to it in the middle of that paragraph, that you initially provided the Inquiry with an out-of-date copy of that protocol, that was MK2-9, and you provided the up-to-date version of that on Friday.

Can you confirm that the new version and, just for the record, I think, there is a gap even between the version at MK2-09 and the new version, I think it is 2019 to 2022, something in the middle there that we don't have but, in any event, the new version appears to have a number of documents embedded in it.     Do you know what I mean by that, we can see where they are?

Do you undertake to provide the Inquiry with those embedded documents in due course, so that the document can be understood fully?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The Trust should be able to provide those.

**Ms Harris**: The new protocol, it says within the document, was to reflect the new national mental health operational pressures escalation levels status, and you say it's the model the Trust is working towards.    I pick that up from your paragraph 36, have I drawn the link correctly?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.   And these are rapidly evolving processes and things have, to some extent, changed after that as well.   As I have stated, there are three SitRep meetings -- the seven SitRep meetings now in the organisation: three in the morning in each locality, three in the afternoon in each locality and one across the organisation to manage the beds.

**Ms Harris**: Can I say this: can you also undertake to provide further evidence to the Inquiry about that document once the Inquiry is better placed to understand what EPUT is now doing?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I will.

**Ms Harris**: Can I deal then now with bed management challenges, which you deal with starting off in 37, where you have already explained that:

"... adult and older peoples' services are challenged at the present time with a significant demand for beds and a high number of patients placed outside of Essex, and with the independent sector both within and outside Essex."

You also say:

"Essex has also experienced a longer length of stay ..."

What do you mean by that?   What are you comparing Essex to when you say you have received a longer length of stay?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the national targets set for length of stay for adult and old age wards, there is an expectation that average length of stay would be around 30 days.   The length of the stay on the wards is much longer than the average -- the expected length of stay.

**Ms Harris**: What is it and what is the average in Essex, do you know?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Hard to say, it varies but it would be around 90/100. Some of these long stay patients, the way it's calculated is also relevant.    If a patient has been staying for a long period, gets discharged, that skews the length of stay because it is calculated at the point of discharge.

**Ms Harris**: You have already made reference to the SitRep meetings. Can we look at paragraph -- in fact, it is my fault it's not on the list, could we look at paragraph 38, Amanda, which is just over the page, please.    It says:

"Each person pending admission [as you have just discussed] is discussed on a twice daily SitRep demand and capacity call ..."

You have touched on it already.     How long has that system been in place?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The -- before I say that, Chair, I would just like to qualify that the 90 days is an -- is not an exact figure.    I am just giving you an estimate.

**The Chair**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the bed management 2019, there is some reference there was one administrator in the south and one administrator in the north and was very basic administrative function.     It was in, I think, 2021 that the flow and capacity, and such teams, took precedence and importance because of the bed pressures.

.. rst-class:: indented

The appointment of the clinical director and the strengthening of the flow and capacity teams was, I think, in the last three or four -- couple of years: 2021 onwards, I would say.

**Ms Harris**: Okay.   Paragraph 38 says:

"... decisions about priority for admission [are] made by the Clinical Flow Lead, the Clinical Director for Flow ... or the Chair of the call."

It says, I think, the Clinical Director for Flow is a consultant psychiatrist.   What is the professional background experience of the Clinical Flow Lead?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: She is a band-8 nurse.

**Ms Harris**: What is the professional background and experience of the Chair of the call?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The band-8 chairs the meeting, unless it is an OPEL escalation, where either a Chief Nurse or the Medical Director is expected to chair the escalation meeting.

**Ms Harris**: Where are patients waiting -- sorry if that seems like an obvious question -- whilst this admission is pending and this decision is being made?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So they use a tool called Smart Tool, which will identify how many patients are in the community waiting for beds, how many patients have had their Mental Health Act assessments, either waiting in A&Es, either waiting in acute hospital beds, so they will have that information of today, in the morning, how many patients either in the homes, in the police, in -- say, in A&Es, in police custody as well, who need admission -- out-of-areas Essex patients who are in London, and how many beds are available and then they will -- there will be a clinical decision discussion around prioritisation which patient needs, you know, the most important, so the most, which is -- bed urgently and where is best place to admit that particular patient.

.. rst-class:: indented

So it's a clinical discussion that takes place in those situation report meetings.

**Ms Harris**: What are patients told about what's going on at that stage, if anything?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's an assumption on my part that they would be saying that "We are looking for a bed".

**Ms Harris**: But that's, you say, a presumption on your part?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, because the bed, if the -- the clinician who is assessing has made a decision to admit the patient, they would then share that information that you need, you need to be admitted, we are looking for a bed for you.

.. rst-class:: indented

Now, that might take a while, and that decision is probably not made at the time by the clinician, by that clinician who's assessing.   They will -- they will contact the bed -- either the gatekeeping team or the bed management team and that will be discussed at the SitRep meetings.

**Ms Harris**: Can you help us.   What is the protocol for patients in crisis within the emergency departments where there is no specialist provision available locally or out-of-area: what happens to them?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the emergency departments have -- each hospital has a Psychiatric Liaison Team and the Psychiatric Liaison Team will have nurses who would be prioritising patients who attend the Accident and Emergency Departments.

.. rst-class:: indented

So they are part of that Psychiatric Liaison Team. They are also the gatekeepers, so they can make a decision, and if a patient requires a bed, they will then contact the bed management team and say this patient requires a bed.

**Ms Harris**: Your paragraph 37 -- we don't need to look at it again, you have already touched on it -- made reference to patients being placed outside of Essex?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: How do you, EPUT, manage and monitor the out-of-area placements?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the care coordinator for the patient is expected to continue providing input to the board where the patient is admitted.   So we have contracted beds, so they are seen as -- in Essex, which are seen as appropriate out-of-area beds and ad hoc, which are seen as inappropriate, even though they are in Essex.

.. rst-class:: indented

We have two band-7 nurses, who have specifically been appointed to oversee the patients who are placed out of the organisation.    They would liaise with the care coordinators and every week at the -- they have a meeting, they use a dashboard which has a list of all the patients who are placed outside, when they were placed, what is the section.   They also collect information on neurodiversity, so that is reviewed and, wherever possible, we will try to repatriate those patients.   But priority would be given to patients who are waiting in the community requiring a bed.

.. rst-class:: indented

So there is an oversight on these patients placed outside.

**Ms Harris**: We heard in our presentation last week, and I take it that covers beds in the independent sector as well --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- nurses are monitoring those.   We heard in our presentation last week that in 2023 there were, I think, 35 NHS out-of-area placements and 799 independent sector placements and, if that's the kind of figures we are talking about, that's two band-7 nurses overseeing all of that, is it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the two band nurses -- most predominantly are placed in Essex, in a number -- there are a number of private providers and we would try to place patients in Essex. These two band nurses will visit the Essex patients but they will also supervise -- oversee the care coordinator, so even if a patient is placed elsewhere, the care coordinator is expected to in-reach into the wards and these two band nurses would get an update from the care coordinator.

.. rst-class:: indented

There are patients -- there are services which we don't provide and -- and when our intensive care units are full we do place patients out of Essex.     We look for a bed PICU bed wherever it is available to manage that situation.

**Ms Harris**: Can I just ask you -- can I use mother and baby units as an example because I think you only have now six beds in Essex --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: -- and, as you say, there are a number of national units so, if somebody is placed, as this must often be the case, quite a long way away in a mother and baby unit, their care coordinator should be constantly overseeing, reviewing and feeding information back; is that what you are saying?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, plus for mother and baby units there are perinatal services, so these patients would be open to perinatal teams.

**Ms Harris**: Moving on to admission assessments, as in the initial assessment when a patient arrives on the unit.    In your paragraph 27 -- please, Amanda, which is, I think, 1104 -- you say:

"Each admission into an EPUT unit should have a clearly defined purpose for assessment and/or treatment that can only be delivered in acute inpatient care and ensure that there is a therapeutic benefit to each admission.   EPUT has developed a new Therapeutic Acute Inpatient Care Operating Model [which you reference] to assist in delivery of standards set by NHS England's guidance for Acute inpatient mental health care for adults and older adults."

By what method does EPUT ensure that there is therapeutic benefit to each admission: how do you ensure that and record it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So this is, again, the same care -- CPA policy applies here.   Every patient who is admitted to a ward will have a care plan identifying the care needs and the treatments, which would be psychological, pharmacological and social aspects as well.   So that care plan and the treatment plan would be the one that is reviewed in the clinical reviews, ward reviews, your MDT meetings and pre-discharge meetings.

**Ms Harris**: How do you keep an eye on it; how do you monitor it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The consultant has an overall responsibility of care and treatment on the ward.   There are CPA care plan audits that are undertaken now, it's on a -- on an electronic system called Tendable, there are Ward Managers' checklists, which have certain responsibilities which Ward Manager has, which are audited.

.. rst-class:: indented

The Tendable audit has an audit on care plan.

**Ms Harris**: You touch on Tendable audits in your statement, in fact, and it is something that we might come back to, as I say, at a later stage in the Inquiry, given what I have already said about monitoring and evaluation.

But you say that there are audits available.     For this particular --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Of care plans, yes.   Care plan it's not the only -- I mean, it is one way of assessing and, as I said, it's -- the clinical oversight has to be with the clinical team to ensure that the patient they are caring for receives the care the patient requires and the service.

**Ms Harris**: You say at your paragraph 27 -- if we could have that back up again, in fact you may remember we just read it out -- that each admission should have a clearly defined purpose for assessment, and at your paragraph 46 -- sorry, Amanda it should be 46, please, which is 1110:

"When the assessing team concludes that an inpatient admission is required, the reasons are formalised in a 'purpose of admission' statement."

That paragraph reads as if the purpose of admission is decided by the team undertaking the pre-admission assessment; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So this is something more recent, we heard from Dr Davidson, in psychiatry.   It was -- the decision was just admit the patient without any clear indication and purpose of why and, therefore, it became quite difficult to provide a precise -- you know, identify the reason.

.. rst-class:: indented

So this is something that has -- with the new operating model has been introduced.   So I must -- wish to state this is something that is more recent.

**Ms Harris**: You talk about the new operating model.   Is there any guidance for those assessment teams then on how specific or broad the purpose of admission should be, how it should be recorded?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There are certain specific forms that need to be completed.    The purpose of admission needs to be documented.

**Ms Harris**: There are specific forms?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, the purpose of admission should be documented and it would take -- the policy states, when -- the document -- the purpose of admission, you see whether it is the most appropriate, least restrictive, there are other alternatives like home treatment that have been considered, is the admission likely to be beneficial or cause any harm to the patient?   And for personality -- patients with certain conditions specific other factors that are taken into consideration, so they have to take -- demonstrate that they have considered all those factors.

**Ms Harris**: Is there guidance on how to complete that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The -- the SOP, there is a SOP for -- for that particular purpose.

**Ms Harris**: Is the purpose of admission something that's fixed at the time of arrival or can it be reconsidered, reviewed, amended potentially, once the patient gets on to the unit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It should be reconsidered and reviewed at every clinical review.

**Ms Harris**: At every clinical review?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The ward reviews and the multi-disciplinary reviews.

**Ms Harris**: We also see that, as well as the admission purpose, which should be recorded in the referring gatekeeping assessment with the clinical record, there should also be an expected date of discharge, and we heard some evidence about this from Dr Davidson in addition.

Does this mean that the team deciding on the admission should also produce the expected date of discharge?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: No.   The expected date of discharge happens on the ward when the patient is admitted.

.. rst-class:: indented

Again, there is no science behind it.   It just focuses the mind of an inpatient treatment to keep the inpatient stay as less as required.

**Ms Harris**: How often is it possible -- or should I put it this way, how often is it not possible -- to provide an expected date of discharge, or do they always come up with one?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: As I said it's arbitrary.    I mean, how do you decide if a patient who has been admitted for treatment of electroconvulsive therapy or treatment resistant schizophrenia, how long that patient is going to take. It's tentative.

.. rst-class:: indented

It is easier for short admissions where you can -- but what it means is that we are not leaving things, as Dr Davidson mentioned, that once the treatment is over, then it decides where the patient gets placed and that delays the length of stay.

.. rst-class:: indented

So the idea is to share with the patient that we are likely to require five or six weeks to get you discharged from the ward.    That is reviewed regularly. It's not fixed and most of the time it's arbitrary.

**Ms Harris**: Does the discharge plan start at that time as well then?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The discharge plan should start.    We have discharge coordinators and their role is to see any obstacles to successful discharge.

**Ms Harris**: We will come to discharge coordinators in a minute.     But the question is: does it start then as well?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It should start at the --

**Ms Harris**: All right.   I'm mindful of the time but let's maybe do the next couple of topics.    We're at a stage now where the patient arrives on the unit and at paragraph 48, you say -- and I think it will come up but I will start reading it while it comes up:

"For individuals identified as requiring informal admission, the pathway is for them to be admitted to the Mental Health Assessment Unit, whenever possible."

We'll come back to that.     There are two in Essex, aren't there?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's true.

**Ms Harris**: "A thorough assessment of the person's mental health presenting need is completed at the assessment unit, leading to the decision to either admit the patient to a treatment ward or discharge the patient from the assessment unit to the care of the appropriate community services."

So the normal route, do we understand it, for an inpatient is through the Mental Health Assessment Unit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: For informal patients.

**Ms Harris**: For informal patients, yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: We have heard about the Urgent Care Department.    You have already told us a little bit about this.    What are the similarities or do you go from Urgent Care to Mental Health Assessment Unit, or can you go from Urgent Care -- how does this work in practice?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the principle is similar to any acute hospital. Acute hospital has an A&E and also has a medical assessment unit where they keep admission patients for a short period.    At the Urgent Care Department, we -- if the patient -- we feel that the patient requires a brief stay for a couple of days to stabilise, for the crisis to be over, they would be admitted to an assessment unit.

.. rst-class:: indented

But if there is -- that the assessment leads to a conclusion that the patient is likely to require a longer period of stay, then they would -- they can admit patients to treatment ward directly.

**Ms Harris**: So they don't need to go via the Mental Health Assessment Unit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They don't.

**Ms Harris**: Welcome packs and information leaflets then.   You have already talked about the fact you said that leaflets and welcome packs have been around for a while.    We have just heard that the patients are admitted to the Mental Health Assessment Unit first, that's the normal route, although the Urgent Care Department can send directly to the treatment ward.

When do patients get their welcome packs and their information leaflets; do they get them at the Mental Health Assessment Unit or is it when they get to the final ward of stay; when are they given this information?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the Urgent -- the Mental Health Assessment Unit is a ward -- it is a ward, so it is treated as a ward.      So they would have their own welcome pack but the patients receive welcome packs once they arrive on that particular unit, for that particular unit.   There are welcome packs for each unit.

**Ms Harris**: So if you were on the Mental Health Assessment Unit and you only stayed there because it was a short stay, you wouldn't get any information?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: On the treatment ward because you are unlikely to go -- you may not go on the treatment.   Once you reach that particular ward, then you would get information about that particular ward.   If you get admitted to a mother and baby unit, they will have their own information pack, CAMHS units will have their own information pack, and so forth.

**Ms Harris**: You have included a number of information packs within your exhibits.   I am not going to ask that we look at all of them, as that would take some time, but can I ask we look at MK2-14, which I think is at 859 internally, and 9105.

This is a welcome pack, it's a Welcome Pack Version 6, and it appears to be, just looking at the front cover, a generic -- if you know what I mean by "generic" -- EPUT welcome pack, rather than a ward-specific one because you provided other ward and unit-specific ones.

When would this one be provided: not on the Mental Health Assessment Unit, as we understand it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is very difficult for me to say, just on the front cover.   There might be information inside about a specific unit but if it's a generic -- then I am not certain whether there is a generic for all the adult wards.

**Ms Harris**: Can we have a look at paragraph 59 of your statement, which is at page 113.   We will need to go over the page in a minute but let's start at the bottom, thank you. It says:

"A holistic nursing assessment is undertaken within the first 24 hours of admission by a Registered Nurse and the paperwork reviewed of any risk assessments or MHA [Mental Health Act] paperwork for detentions that have already been assessed pre-admission.   EPUT staff will undertake these assessments in line with the Trust guidance.   This will include ..."

I am not going to ask you about the other parts that we know about but could we look at bullet point (o), which is on the following page, please.   It says:

"Give the patient a Welcome Pack (including info about mealtimes, visiting times, contact details, My Care My Recovery ..."

Those are plans, aren't they, leaflet about:

"... home first leaflet, rights leaflet, sexual safety leaflet, Why We Hold You leaflet, Oxehealth fact sheet etc)."

When would they all be together?     When would the patients be given that welcome pack, is that what you are talking about: all of those come together, do they?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's my understanding.     It's on admission, that's the checklist.   Nurses have a checklist of once the patient is admitted there are certain tasks they need to complete and giving a welcome pack is a part of that checklist.

**Ms Harris**: You say that the holistic nursing assessment has to be undertaken within 24 hours.    Does that mean a patient could be waiting 24 hours before they get information about mealtimes and when their family can come and visit, and so on and so forth?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So it -- it's 24 hours is -- it is done in stages.       So not all when the patient is -- once a patient enters the ward.   It is about familiarising the patient with the ward, showing their bedroom, asking the doctor to undertake an initial assessment, physical examination, so -- and then maybe once the patient has settled down, the nurse may sit down to formulate a care plan.    So it doesn't happen immediately.

.. rst-class:: indented

There are priorities, just getting those physical examinations and drug charts, medicines reconciliation, all those done on admission.   So it is done in stages. The welcome pack would be offered to the patient once the patient is on the ward.

.. rst-class:: indented

It's about -- and again it will be catered to the patient as well.   If the patient is acutely disturbed or distressed you would focus on that particular aspect of care, settling the patient down.

**Ms Harris**: You say "would".   Again, is that something that you know happens in practice or that should happen in practice?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That should happen.

**The Chair**: Is this also, the care plan process, is that the care plan that's being produced as a result?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's a checklist of all these things and care plan is one of the items in that checklist.   So check CPA initial assessment and then start formulating a care plan, where the nurse would sit with the patient and look at what the individual aspects of treatment and care are, and that's reviewed in the ward rounds and the MDT reviews.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you.

For the record, thank you, Chair, can I clarify that would include -- and we don't need to look at them now

-- your exhibits, MK2-151, which is My Care My Recovery

Care Plan --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right, yes.

**Ms Harris**: -- and MK2-152, My Care My Safety Plan?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right.

**Ms Harris**: Those are the documents that would be provided within

24 hours and a nurse would sit down with the patient?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They would start doing that.

**Ms Harris**: Is that what you are saying?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They may not be able to finish that completing that within

.. rst-class:: indented

the timeframe.

**Ms Harris**: You said it's been happening, or something along those

lines has been happening for a long time.   Can you say

how long it's been the practice to offer a welcome pack

to patients arriving on the ward?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Sorry, say that again?

**Ms Harris**: How long has it been the practice at EPUT to provide

this kind of welcome pack?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I mean, I can recall -- and this is a recollection of

.. rst-class:: indented

working as a medical director for SEPT -- that some form

.. rst-class:: indented

of information was provided to patients, even early on

.. rst-class:: indented

when I joined as a medical director --

**Ms Harris**: So that's --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: -- in 2012.

**Ms Harris**: -- 2012.   You have already talked about a nurse sitting down in relation to the care plan.    What other opportunities are given to patients who are arriving, first time on a ward for some of them, potentially, to discuss all of this information that's been given?     Are they left to look at it alone or can they ask questions of people?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Certainly, certainly, yes, they are allowed to ask -- they would be asked questions.   It is done along with the patient.

**Ms Harris**: I am sure they are allowed to ask but what are the opportunities for them to do it.     Will somebody go and check they understand or?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So that's the part of the -- developing a care plan, when the nurse would -- the doctor would -- on admission would undertake history taking, will settle the patient, do an examination, and the nurse would then explain what happens on the ward, take them through the process, show their room, and then sit down with the patient to take their own nursing history and do the nursing.      So that's an interaction with the clinician and a patient.

**Ms Harris**: Again, you are talking in terms of this is something that should happen?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That happens.

**Ms Harris**: You say that happens?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I -- it -- a patient on admission would have a clerking by a junior doctor -- by a trainee doctor.     I would be surprised if a patient -- unless the patient is too distressed and it is left for a while.    The majority of cases, there might be exceptions.

**Ms Harris**: Just to finish off this topic momentarily.    At paragraph 47, we may not need to look at it again, you also make reference to information being provided to families and carers.   You say that this information is shared with the person and where appropriate with their chosen carers and relevant partner services.    Staff offer the patient an information booklet on the Mental Health Act at the appropriate time and a carers support information booklet to the carers to guide them whilst supporting the patient.     That's in relation to the Mental Health Act but there is also another leaflet, the MK2-12, which we will come to a little later, which is the "Carer Support: Information For Carers" and you say that these patient information leaflets were updated in 2024 from the previous iterations.

Again, when was the first iteration of the information for carers; how long has information leaflets been provided to carers?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I will have to get back to you on that one.

**Ms Harris**: Are families and carers given a copy of the same welcome pack as given to the patients?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I am not certain on that either.

**Ms Harris**: We will come back to the carers leaflet when we talk about the involvement of families.

Chair, we have been going, I think, for about an hour and 20 minutes.    Would that be a convenient moment for a 10-minute break?

**The Chair**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you very much.

*(11.22 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(11.35 am)*

**The Chair**: Ms Harris.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you, Chair.    Can I just ask a few more questions, please, about assessment on the Mental Health Assessment Unit prior to admission to what is deemed to be the appropriate unit.    We will recall your paragraph 48 -- we could perhaps put it back up again, please, Amanda, that would be very helpful -- which identifies the need for a thorough assessment:

"For individuals identified as requiring informal admission, the pathway is for them to be admitted to the Mental Health Assessment Unit, wherever possible."

Then you go on to talk about a thorough assessment.

You have also explained that that is the pathway for most, for informal patients, is to go through the Mental Health Assessment Unit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: In circumstances, however, where a patient has already been identified as requiring an informal admission, say, from one of the gatekeeping teams, why is it necessary for them to be assessed again within the assessment unit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Chair, before I answer this, can I quickly clarify a point on the earlier -- in addition to -- on the family involvement?

.. rst-class:: indented

Recognising the importance of family involvement, and we know it hasn't been great, the Trust has recently appointed family support workers to liaise with the family, rather than just relying on the leaflets and information.

.. rst-class:: indented

And the reason for admitting these patients to an assessment unit -- although it is called an assessment unit, we do provide treatment, and it is about can these patients with brief intervention have their crisis managed, rather than -- instead of going to a treatment ward.   Sometimes patients have a brief crisis, which settles down after a few days or, if a patient has been recalled on the -- under CTO for a patient not taking treatment, we bring the patient to an assessment unit, get the patient started on treatment and then the patient is discharged.

.. rst-class:: indented

So it, the purpose is not only assessment, also brief treatment for brief periods.

**Ms Harris**: Let me ask it another way, we have already heard about the Urgent Care Department and how patients can go straight from the Urgent Care Department to an inpatient ward, not going to the Mental Health Assessment Unit, and your statement says "wherever possible".     So, other than the Urgent Care Department, are there other circumstances where a patient could bypass the Mental Health Assessment Unit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Mental Health Act, so you are talking about --

**Ms Harris**: I am talking about informal patients?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: -- informal patients?     Elderly care, old age units, would take patients directly without going through the assessment unit.   Adults, if there isn't any bed on the assessment unit and a patient requires a bed, then the system is flexible.   There are no rigid rules and the bed management or the SitRep would make a decision to admit the patient directly to a treatment ward.

**Ms Harris**: So --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's -- in general, the principle is that, if a patient is an informal admission, let's route them through the assessment unit.   It's not -- it's not something which can't -- you know, there -- it can be changed based on the clinical requirement needs.

**Ms Harris**: Can we look at your paragraph 54, please, and I just want to clarify where you are talking about here.   It says:

"Within the first 4 hours of admission to the ward, as per the Royal College Standards, the immediate care needs for the admitted patient is assessed by the ward resident doctor ..."

Then you go on to talk about the assessment being part of the clerking process.

Is that four hours of admission to the Mental Health Assessment Unit or to another ward, if they have bypassed the unit, or both?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: If the patient goes through an assessment unit, the whole clerking assessment examination will take place at the assessment unit.    If the patient is then transferred from an assessment unit to a treatment unit, the treatment unit doctor would do maybe not a detailed clerking, as the initial clerking because it's seen as a transfer, but they would do some form of clerking and examination of the patient.

**Ms Harris**: So paragraph 54 applies to whatever ward the patient arrives on first?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right.

**Ms Harris**: All right.   You refer to the Royal College of Psychiatry Standards, which date from 2019 and the first edition from 2015.   What were the standards that were applied in the earlier part of the period we are concerned about, 2000 to 2015, as far as you are concerned?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: On admission, the nurse in charge would ring the on call doctor.   After hours, the doctor would attend and do the clerking.    During working hours, the ward on the -- the doctor on the ward will do the clerking.    So this has always been a standard practice.

**Ms Harris**: At paragraph 56, I am not going to go through them all, you set out the steps included in the medical assessment and clerking.   At paragraph 57, you say the designated consultant psychiatrist has medical responsibility for the patient during the admission and, at 58, you say the consultant psychiatrist has overall responsibility for treatment and diagnosis.

So we take from that, do we, that it is the consultant who is the key decision maker at the time?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Paragraph 59 -- could we put that up, please, Amanda at 1113 -- it says "The consultant" -- it might be, I think, over the page.     Yes, we may need to go over but we'll come to it in a moment.    It says:

"The consultant psychiatrist will see the patient formally within the first week as part of the MDT clinical review." Does this mean the patient may go a few days before seeing the consultant for the first time after admission?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Patients are definitely seen.   So, the -- the practise varies.   The minimum standard is that the patient should be seen first week of admission.     All units -- most the units have a middle grade doctor or a speciality doctor and, if the consultant is not available, the speciality doctor would provide advice and support to the trainee doctor.

.. rst-class:: indented

The consultants work -- with the functional model, we have consultants working on the wards and they are more or less on the ward most of the days.

.. rst-class:: indented

The consultant job plan is devised such that they have one and a half days for other professional activities, 7.5 for direct clinical care, and there might be times when they are not seeing patients within the first 48 or 72 hours.   Most of the patients would be seen within 72 hours of admission.

**Ms Harris**: Sorry, I am corrected that would have been in paragraph 57.   I think I said paragraph 59.    I am not going to take you through the rest of paragraphs 59 to 61, in which you set out the process and what should happen by the various points but can I ask you this again: is there a difference in the assessment process for somebody that was previously unknown, who's there for the first time, as opposed to somebody who had previously been known to services, or is it the standard?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The process will be the standard.

**Ms Harris**: Just going back to the Mental Health Assessment Units. There's two in Essex, as you have identified?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Yes.   They could be some distance away -- Essex is a very big county -- from a person's home address.    What is the benefit then of using an assessment unit in those circumstances?    You have talked about for people the Mental Health Assessment Unit is -- you say there is a benefit if they could benefit from just a short period of stay but, putting those types of patients to one side for a moment.     What is the benefit of using an assessment unit instead of admitting directly to a ward for others?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So when these assessment units were opened, there were two purposes.     One is, as I stated, to undertake a comprehensive assessment, rather than relying on a single assessment but, also, at that -- at that time, once a patient was admitted to a treatment ward there was a tendency for patients to stay for a longer period, things didn't move at pace, and the idea is that, if you admit a patient for five days on an assessment unit, you might be able to manage beds in a more effective way.

**Ms Harris**: Is there a minimum period of time that an informal patient can stay on a Mental Health Assessment Unit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The assessment units are for -- they were started -- they were opened with an intention of -- idea of not more than five days, but we have patients detained on the wards and now it's become how you best manage the situation, if you require a bed.    Patients get admitted to an assessment unit and become -- then you realise they are not willing to take treatment or they deteriorate and then they land up being detained.

.. rst-class:: indented

Now, ideally, we don't want detained patients on the assessment unit but, for them to be -- for us to identify a treatment bed for them, but it means that they land up staying on an assessment unit under Section of the Mental Health Act.

**Ms Harris**: Sorry, I was going to come to Section under the Mental Health Act in a moment.    It may be my misunderstanding, I thought it was informal patients that we were dealing with currently?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: We do have -- as I mentioned informal patients can be detained on the assessment and beyond this --

**Ms Harris**: Sorry -- I understand.    But just to pick up, if I understood, you are saying that they were -- the intention was that patients wouldn't stay more than five days?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: There isn't a minimum period of time?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There isn't a minimum period of time.   The idea is to undertake an assessment.    If you can undertake an assessment within the first day and decide the patient does not require to stay on the ward or it's absolutely clear that the patient is quite unwell and needs treatment, you can move the patient to a treatment ward the same day.

**Ms Harris**: Okay.   Can I move then to Mental Health Act admissions. There is a distinction, you have made it clear in your evidence, it is in your paragraph 50 as well, mental health admission is directly to a treatment ward not via the assessment unit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Why the difference?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: To detain some -- a patient against their wishes is indicative of how unwell the patient is and the patients are likely to stay for a longer period.    It's different to having -- someone having a brief crisis and requiring brief support for a short period to keep them safe, so that they can continue the treatment at home through the home treatment team.

.. rst-class:: indented

Detained patients usually tend to stay for a longer period.

**Ms Harris**: We have already looked at your paragraph 47, so I am not going to ask that we look at it again, but you will recall it refers to the staff offering the patient an information booklet on the Mental Health Act at the appropriate time.    When is the appropriate time for staff to offer a patient, who is subject to a formal admission in the circumstances that you have just described potentially, an information booklet on the Mental Health Act?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: When the patient is settled, patient might be too distressed, quite unwell, quite paranoid and may not be in a mental state to receive the information and there is no point providing that information when he's too disturbed or unwell and, as the patient improves, that would be, in my opinion, the best time to provide that information to the patient.

**Ms Harris**: Can I just ask you about some challenges relating to admission.   Paragraphs 44 to 89 are where you have set out in your statement what should happen, which is arguably to reflect, you know, what would be good practice.

But just in terms of challenges, we have looked at 59 to 61, albeit the latter part briefly, and reference to holistic nursing assessment.   They must take some time to complete?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They do take some time.

**Ms Harris**: How long?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is done over a period of time.   So the care plan -- there are different aspects to it and I -- so physical examination, say, would take 10/15 minutes, so the blood investigations.   Taking history would take one hour for a trainee doctor.   The nurse probably taking her own assessment would spend an hour or so at the beginning.

.. rst-class:: indented

And then there are other assessments, VTE, venous thromboembolism assessments, your -- for old age wards, fall assessments.   So these would be done over a period of days.

**Ms Harris**: Can I assume from what you have said and what you have described with different personnel involved that there are challenges, for example, if you have got staffing issues?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Staffing issues -- yes.

**Ms Harris**: There are challenges with that --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, yes.

**Ms Harris**: -- holistic assessment if there are staffing issues?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, yes.

**Ms Harris**: Any other challenges?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I think staffing would be the main -- yes, even if the ward is quite unsettled and disturbed, the patient -- admitted patient should receive the initial assessment, the care plan.   So that would, I presume -- and the clinical presentation could be another challenge.    So if the patient is ready, well enough -- some patients refuse physical examinations, blood investigations and you have to wait until they are amenable or agreeable to those assessments.

**Ms Harris**: Can I just ask, I appreciate that we are putting this as a more complicated topic for further investigation, but is there monitoring of compliance with this holistic assessment requiring?   Is it --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The care plans are monitored.   The physical examination and the clerking is taken -- I think it's, there is a discharge summary that, which covers all those aspects of initial assessment, initial presentation, that's shared with the GP and the clinical team.   So a discharge summary would include all those aspects of initial history, the stay on the ward, the treatments offered, along with the treatment plan.

**Ms Harris**: Is there monitoring of the timing, whether they are seen in four hours by the doctor and 24 hours by the nurse?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I am not certain about the monitoring of the timings.

**Ms Harris**: Is there monitoring about the information being provided?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Information?

**Ms Harris**: Well, there's information -- the welcome packs, the information about advocacy, that kind of thing?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So there are, there are Ward Managers' responsibilities and there are audits, and I am not entirely clear what a Ward Manager audit -- which areas they cover.   But they do cover areas like evidence that families have been involved, or patient-led goals have been included. So there are ways -- ward level audits that are undertaken.

**Ms Harris**: Are there monitoring of safeguarding issues raised?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Safeguarding team would do their own.   There would be safeguarding audits in the organisation.

**Ms Harris**: You have just said that the care plans were monitored. Who --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Sorry, are monitored.

**Ms Harris**: Are monitored, sorry.   Who has responsibility for the care plans?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The care plans are -- should be audited by the Ward Manager.    Ward Manager would have the overall responsibility of ensuring care plans are done.

**Ms Harris**: Can I move on, we will come back to care planning in a moment but can I come back to consideration of other personal characteristics and comorbidities at admission. Just dealing firstly with physical health considerations and how you deal with those.

You provided the Inquiry with MK2-28, which is a policy dated 2023, although it looks like it was first published in June 2022.

Could we just have a look at that, please, Amanda. I think it's at 9514, it starts, and it's at 1268 internally.

These clinical guidelines represent a decision by the Trust, I think, to move to the use of the National Early Warning Scoring System, NEWS2?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: If we look at paragraph 2.1, which is on page 9518, or 1272 internally, it explains what that is, which is that:

"The Royal College of Physicians originally developed NEWS to standardise the assessment of acute -- illness severity across the NHS [and that it's] used as a surveillance system for all inpatients, tracking their clinical (physical) condition ...

"NEWS2 is the latest version of the National Early Warning Scores, first produced in 2012 and updated in December 2017 which advocates a system to standardised the assessment and response to acute illness."

Then it goes on to set out what NEWS2 is used to improve, the assessments it is intended to improve.

So NEWS2 is used to monitor and if we look at, I think, 5.5 -- so I think we need to go to 1275.

Do we see at 5.1 that:

"NEWS2 must be used for all inpatients or when a decision has been made to admit."

Then at 5.5, it sets out the physiological observations that are required and I think, if we look at page 9525 -- apologies, I haven't got the -- but it may be that you can help us with this and we don't need to look at it.   The minimum rate is, I think, every 12 hours; does that sound right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Sorry, say that again?

**Ms Harris**: Sorry, it is my fault.   Let's look at Table 2.   That is the clinical response, that is the timings for which monitoring should be carried out?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's (unclear) -- so NEWS is a nursing assessment of a rapid deterioration of a patient.   This is in addition to the physical examination and monitoring undertaken by the junior doctors and the consultants of chronic medical conditions and other medical conditions. This is specifically focusing on rapid deterioration, monitoring the pulse, blood pressure, respiratory rate and other vital parameters.   What it means is that, if the NEWS score is zero, that means there are no concerns and you just monitor and, as the concerns increase, as the score increases, there are then -- you need, you know, what -- how quickly should you raise the matter with the ward doctor or the senior member.

**Ms Harris**: You have referred to MUSE, which I think is a system.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: This is NEWS.

**Ms Harris**: This is NEWS2.   But to clarify, NEWS2, according to this document, is applied as appropriate --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: All patients on the wards will have NEWS.

**Ms Harris**: -- within mental health units.

Can I ask you about neurodiversity considerations, please.   We looked at this in part yesterday in relation to pre-admission assessments.    Can we look again, please.

In fact, for a moment it doesn't matter.    Let's just go back to paragraph 44, which we have already looked at, where we know that the inpatient admissions into EPUT includes a review of their records, where possible, to gather information from any prior assessments and care plans and to identify advance choices, and some sort of assessment.   Also, there is reference to information from prior assessments and care plans.

What provisions are there on admission assessments for neurodivergence, to determine whether a patient is fit for a specific area?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the clerking, the initial assessment, where a doctor should identify there are -- the patients have autistic traits of autism, in addition the consultant input and the wards have ward psychologists who are trained at identifying, and they would help the inpatient team to make reasonable adjustments and develop a care plan, what is required for a patient who's present who has neurodiversity.

**Ms Harris**: Can I just ask if we can jump ahead to your paragraph 90 please, which is on 1123, which says:

"On admission, initial assessments from the medical and nursing team will review any information supplied during the pre-admission stage of diverse patient needs and adjustments for language, cultural considerations or specific conditions, like neurodiversity and physical/ cognitive disabilities, and seek solutions and inclusion in the development of the care plan."

How are those pre-existing conditions, including autism, or the effect it may have, included in the patient's diagnosis and care plan?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So if the patient already has a diagnosis of autism, then there would be a CTR review, Community Treatment Review, which would decide what's the treatment plan for the patient, what is the best option for the patient, so that patient comes with some information through the CTR.    Patients have My Passport -- My Health Passport that would have some information about a patient.

.. rst-class:: indented

But it will be the team would rely on consultant, the ward psychologist to help them devise a care plan more appropriate to the needs of the person with neurodiversity.

**Ms Harris**: So you agree that some specialist input should be sought wherever possible?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.    We have -- I have appointed a consultant psychiatrist for ASD.    Her role is not to take -- she doesn't have a caseload.     Her role is purely supportive and advisory.     This is in a more -- more recently.

**Ms Harris**: How long has that been in place?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: A year and a half or two years at the most.

**Ms Harris**: Before then?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: And, the -- and there is an option of second opinions, so they with could contact consultants asking for our Head of Autism Services.     She makes herself available if there is -- a team requires a moderation and support advice on treating patients with autism.

**Ms Harris**: If we look at your paragraph 96, please, which is at 1124, it suggests that:

"In the absence of a diagnosis, staff supporting patients who report experiencing difficulties consistent with neurodiversity, can still consider making reasonable adjustments ..."

Do you accept that they should consider --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: -- rather than can?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: I know we touched on this yesterday but what specific reasonable adjustments do you say should be considered or made for a patient with a neurodevelopmental condition or difficulties consistent with such a condition?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So it's more about having -- providing clear concise information about the ward routines, ward structures; mindful of the communication patterns; give information; and the flexibility in terms of their requirements; the environment, providing calming environment, so, as I mentioned, some wards have sensory rooms, sensory areas; providing some aids like headphones, if they want to dampen the noise on the ward.

.. rst-class:: indented

So that would form part of their care plans.

**Ms Harris**: You have made reference to the Health Passport, My Health Passport.    Is there any monitoring, do you know, to evaluate how reliably staff explore whether a patient has one or whether they look at one?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: My understanding is patients who have Health Passports are quite good at, you know, sharing their -- I am not certain whether that's monitored on the wards.

**Ms Harris**: You say that's your understanding; is that your experience as well?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I haven't worked with patients with learning disabilities.

**Ms Harris**: Where's your understanding from?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's -- it comes from people who have autism are quite structured, concrete -- sorry, structured, and I qualify my statement that that's an assumption.

**Ms Harris**: It's an assumption?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: You told us a little bit yesterday, and I said we would come back to it today, about training that's given in relation to neurodiversity.    Can we look at your paragraph 91, please, which is on 1123, in which you say:

"Staff across the Trust receive role specific competency based mandatory training on neurodiversity and the Trust has commissioned the Oliver McGowan Learning Disability and Autism training in 2023 developed for this purpose, which is NHS England's preferred and recommended training for health and social care staff.     Compliance is monitored and reported across the Trust Community and Mental Health services ..."

As I say, you reference this repeatedly yesterday when I was asking how EPUT were helping and supporting staff identify and take into account neurodevelopmental conditions at pre-admission assessment.

So we see that it was commissioned, I think it was 2023.   Since when has it been delivered: how long has the Trust been delivering that training?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I would have to get back to you on that one.

**Ms Harris**: You have referred to compliance and you provided to the Inquiry a training compliance record.    Can I just ask you about that.    It's your MK2-238 and it's in the 6A bundle, Amanda, which is at 15912 for anyone following the main numbering, or internal page number 11.

I just wonder if you could help us a little with this.   Do you see it, do you recognise it?    It's not quite there yet, I don't think.     Are we able to go in a little bit closer?   Thank you.

On 15912, it is the table.    We see there are two parts to the training; can you see that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Can you see it now?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: There are two parts of the training, and you have set out overall competence then you have set out the component parts.   Part 1 is that online?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is online training.

**Ms Harris**: Would that explain why there is a reasonable compliance rate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It would.

**Ms Harris**: Part 2, poor compliance, I think you would probably agree.     What's happening there, is that in-person training?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is a day's face-to-face training and I think it was due to the limitation of the slots, which I understand have been increased recently.

**Ms Harris**: Who delivers it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's -- the Training Department oversees the delivery but I am not sure.

**Ms Harris**: Sorry?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The Training Department would oversee the delivery of the --

**Ms Harris**: Okay.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: -- core and mandatory training, essential training.

**Ms Harris**: You have explained that it is a statutory requirement, yes?     Does this compliance record mean that the Trust isn't meeting its statutory obligations?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's the part -- the Part 1 is for everyone.     It provides a basic understanding of what the presentation what the needs are, what reasonable adjustments need to be made.     I think Part 2 is more specific and detailed training.

**Ms Harris**: Do you know what Part 2 involves?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's -- as I said, it's a face-to-face -- a full-day training.

**Ms Harris**: What does it cover?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It covers more detailed specifics around communication patterns, and other aspects of care and treatment.

**Ms Harris**: Would you agree with the suggestion that that level of compliance might indicate that staff are not well informed or prepared for issues that might arise?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So I am, I am aware that Psychology Department has provided training to ward staff and they have several other programmes.     The ward psychologist, the ward had a psychologist and the psychologist would -- if a patient is admitted who had neurodiversity, would provide that guidance/support to the staff.

**Ms Harris**: You mention that, in fact, I think, and I won't go to it as such at paragraph 119(d), but is EPUT is that the way EPUT is addressing the problem of this accessing this mandatory training?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: You would want to increase the number of slots and availability for the training.     I understand making it having face to face makes it somewhat challenging.

**Ms Harris**: Are EPUT staff specifically trained, perhaps in your -- well, I'm going to call it in-house, with your psychology teams to seek expert input on neurodiversity?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The expert advice and support is available to the staff through the autism consultant, through the autism team and through the psychologists on the ward.

**Ms Harris**: Does that training given by the psychology team, how does that fit in with the statutory requirements with your duty to provide the training?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I am probably not the best person to answer that.

**Ms Harris**: Can I turn to the question of diagnoses, more generally.

At your paragraph 101, I am just going to summarise, you state the admitting doctor usually will consider various differential diagnoses and, at 104, you suggest that the patient will have a provisional diagnosis during the first 24 hours.

Is that realistic?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's the standard practice.   Every clerking doctor would give a provisional diagnosis on which the initial treatment is started.

**Ms Harris**: Do you agree that it's -- or what is your view, I should perhaps ask, what is EPUT's view -- we have heard evidence from Dr Davidson about it last week -- about whether a patient should be discharged with a diagnosis, the importance of a diagnosis on discharge?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: We do provide a diagnosis on discharge and that's a requirement and standard to provide a diagnosis on discharge.

**Ms Harris**: You gave evidence yesterday -- and I won't go back to it, but you will recall -- about challenges when a patient is under the influence of alcohol or drugs or experiencing withdrawal symptoms.

What are the diagnostic challenges involved in distinguishing between drug-induced behaviours and conditions and those which are unconnected but are complicated by the presentation?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So if a -- if a patient presents with psychosis as a result of drugs, drug-induced psychosis, the treatment would predominantly be the same.    You still treat the psychosis elements of it.   If the patient has alcohol and is withdrawing, the wards will provide a detoxification.

.. rst-class:: indented

So the treatment would be based on the condition, the diagnosis and the clinical presentation, but a drug-induced psychosis is standard treatment process likewise if someone is withdrawing there will be a standard treatment process.

**Ms Harris**: Were there any specific standards or best practice guidelines that EPUT were following, in respect of an approach to formulating a diagnosis in those circumstances where a patient has comorbid alcohol or substance misuse?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: We follow the International Classification of Diseases, ICD-10, diagnostic criteria.

**Ms Harris**: Can I move to an overview of the inpatient experience and particularly interaction with staff.   The interaction of staff, would you agree, is a central part of the initial experience?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: You give a lot of evidence, and I will try and deal with it quickly, about the MDT and the multi-disciplinary team overview.

Can we begin, please, by looking at your paragraph 114, which is on page 1128.   You indicate that:

"The staff that interact with patients include members of the [MDT] which has a core membership ..."

You list them there: the consultant psychiatrist and other medical staff; nursing staff and mental health support workers, including the patient's key worker; pyschotherapists, clinical psychologists and psychology team; operational therapists; speech and language therapists; activity coordinators; social workers; and Approved Mental Health Professionals.

Are those persons present or available on every ward?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: AMHPs don't work on the ward so the last statement, the last point, is not correct.

**Ms Harris**: Yes, that was going to be my next question.    What is AMHP involvement in inpatient care?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I presume they are probably involved -- when a patient is detained on a ward, it is the responsibility of the Approved Mental Health Professional to be in reach and provide/share the details of the assessment so, other than that, AMHP do not form -- they are not a core member of the team.   That's an error.

**Ms Harris**: At paragraphs 116 and 117 -- I am going to summarise -- you describe the role of the psychological services team.    At paragraph 119, you state that there are multiple types of psychological treatments offered to patients, including one to one, groups, variation on group contact, indirect work and you also make reference to an exhibit.   Can I ask you about it, please, which is your MK2-56, which is at page 10009 of the exhibit 6 bundle which has an internal number of 1763.

It's a document from -- sorry, it hasn't arrived yet.    Sorry, Amanda, I realise we are going between bundles.

This is from February 2025.   Can you help us: what is this document, please, how did it come about?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I think it -- it's a document prepared by the Psychology Department.    I see it has the given understanding of what the number of -- different number -- types and numbers of psychologists are there on the inpatient units.

**Ms Harris**: To be clear, this relates to this year, early this year, February 2025; it says at the top?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right.   It looks like an update on the current positions of psychologists on the inpatient units.

**Ms Harris**: Just dealing with some other aspects of psychological treatment, at your paragraph 123 -- I think that can come down, thank you, Amanda -- you say:

"In older adult services [this is at your statement], defined as age 70 and over [you say that] and for patients with a frailty score of 5 and above the Mid Essex Psychology Services Team have implemented a pyramid of care to organise psychological input for an individual on the ward."

You explain the difference, I think, between psychological input, in your statement, to adults and older adults.   Can I just clarify something.   At paragraph 127 -- and sorry, just to confirm, if one reads through your statement 124, 125, 126, they are all paragraphs referring to older adults?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: That's what I want you to clarify.   In 127, 128 and 129, you deal with that:

"In Mid Essex, prior to 2011, there was no funded, dedicated psychology provision to inpatient services."

I will come back to it in a minute.   In 128:

"In West Essex, there was no ward based psychological therapist staffing provision prior to 2018.   In South Essex psychology provision was in a similar position with no dedicated funding resource pre-2018.

Can you clarify: is that still all referring to older adults?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's my understanding.

**Ms Harris**: Well, it is your statement.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is referring to older adults.

**Ms Harris**: So prior to that time, was there no funding?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There was an input from psychologists where most of the psychological activities were provided by the nurses and occupational therapists trained in providing psychological interventions, with an oversight from a psychologist.   So but the wards did not have (unclear) psychologists.

**Ms Harris**: So it was done by other healthcare professionals with oversight?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: I am not going to ask you about all of them, but you have listed other members, as we have seen, of the MDT and you deal with them in your statement in sections. Can I just ask, what is the role of the care coordinator; is that the person as per the CPA?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Community care coordinator, that's correct.    The understanding is, if a patient is admitted on the ward, it means that the care -- the patient, the presentation is complex and warrants -- and needs a care coordinator to coordinate the care post-discharge.

**Ms Harris**: You refer to a key worker in your paragraph 114(b) and key worker interactions in 165; what is the key worker --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The key worker is --

**Ms Harris**: -- what is the role of the key worker?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: -- the worker on the ward, the named nurse.    The terminology is different but it is the role is pretty much the same.   The care coordinator is someone from the community team who is then reaching into the ward, following the patient from the community into the ward after the patient's discharged.   The key worker or the named nurses the one who is on the ward.

**Ms Harris**: I was going to ask about the named nurse or the allocated nurse; what is their role?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So they have an overall responsibility of ensuring that the aspects of care for that particular patient on that ward are completed -- are taken care of under the supervision of the nurse in charge.    So every patient has some continuity of care, so that it is not a piecemeal care.    There is one nurse who has been identified as the key nurse for that patient who would follow the patient throughout the journey on an inpatient ward.

**Ms Harris**: Ward round and other meetings, again hopefully I can deal with this quickly and I will make reference to your statement but won't necessarily ask that it be put up. You have given various meetings and types of meetings.

In paragraph 57, you refer to the MDT clinical review.

In paragraph 163, you refer to ward rounds which run from weekly to fortnightly, depending on the individual unit's frequency.

At paragraph 165, you refer to a minimum of weekly formal reviews through ward rounds, care rounds, MDT meetings and key worker interactions.

In paragraph 168, you say ward rounds take place weekly or fortnightly, depending on the units.

At paragraph 408, which is much later on and we have heard some evidence about it from our experts, there is reference to huddles and to team meetings.

Can you help us, please.     How do all these meetings relate to each other?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So there is, there is -- every day, there is a morning nursing handover, morning and evening, so that's about looking at what care has been provided and what care needs to be provided on that day.

.. rst-class:: indented

The MDT meeting is where the team professionals will meet and look at the progress, what the needs are, share their information, if the psychologist has undertaken assessment.

**Ms Harris**: How often is that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's weekly.    And a clinical review ward round.   And there is an impression that a ward round everyone is present but that's, there could be just the ward the consultant, the ward -- the minimum, the consultant -- representation from nurses, the trainee doctor, and family members and the patient.

.. rst-class:: indented

So that ward round will involve presence of a patient and the family member.

**Ms Harris**: The MDT meeting?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: MDT is about reviewing the progress and what needs to be done.   That will share -- will be shared with the patient in the ward round.

**Ms Harris**: The ward round, I think you have said, is -- can range from weekly to fortnightly, so there is an MDT meeting and a ward round every week?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.    When you say ward round, it is not like morning, 9 to 5.   The ward round could be spread out throughout the week depending upon the consultant because some consultants may have -- see patients throughout the week, two slots say in the morning.    Some consultants might want to do it on two days or three days so it varies but every patient should have -- a ward -- a review by a consultant once a week.

**Ms Harris**: What is a care round?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Care round?

**Ms Harris**: You made reference to a ward round, care rounds?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Probably it is the ward round.

**Ms Harris**: Key worker interactions, how regular would they be?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They are one to one time spent with the key worker.

**Ms Harris**: In paragraph 169 -- sorry, there is one I should have asked you about -- which other meetings, huddles -- would the families and carers be present or invited to?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The families are invited to the ward rounds and, if the family wants to meet with the consultant, the ward clerk or the medical secretary should arrange for a time with the family.   So there's no -- there is no hard and fixed.   You know, of course these are ward consultants, they should have time throughout the week to meet the families at the family's convenience.

**Ms Harris**: Yes, thank you.   Huddles, I mentioned them, but didn't go back to them --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the huddle is where anyone on the ward can ask for a huddle if there is an incident or there is a need for a matter to be discussed, and it is also about staff providing emotional support to each other.   So suppose a patient has been -- there's been an incident, and the incident has been dealt with, it's about checking how staff are all right, what's the situation, what's the ward temperature, right?

.. rst-class:: indented

So these are at least one huddle a day to look at the ward temperature, how the staff are coping and managing, and any incidents.

**Ms Harris**: We also heard, I think, that matters might be discussed such as what did we achieve yesterday and what do we need to achieve today; would that be discussed in a huddle?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: No, that's a Red to Green meeting that happens -- that's another meeting, soon after the handover, where they would quickly go through each patient to see whether the tasks that were allocated yesterday were completed, that means green; if not then it's red.   And if there are three or four red days then the matter needs to be escalated, saying that nothing seems to be happening by keeping the patient on the ward and it's just an escalation process.

**Ms Harris**: At paragraph 169, you say some patients require more frequent interaction.   What units, which type of units?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Every unit, as the patient is admitted, they are quite unwell and they would have more interactions, the doctors would see them more frequently, and as they get better.

.. rst-class:: indented

I would say PICU probably is an example where a patient is acutely distressed and disturbed and would have greater input and interaction.

**Ms Harris**: How often during their stay or time on a ward, first of all on the assessment unit, should patients have direct contact with a consultant?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: On an assessment in inpatients, there are ward rounds every day on an assessment.   So two doctors see patients every day.

**Ms Harris**: Once transferred to the treatment ward?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Then the consultant should see, at least, as a minimum, once a week.    But that could vary.   The consultant could see the patient every day, depending on the clinical presentation.    It need not be, you know, a ward round for -- a patient's consultant will need to wait for a ward round to see a patient.

**Ms Harris**: Do I assume from a previous answer given that the level of contact may well vary between those on a ward voluntarily and those detained under the Mental Health Act?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Not necessarily.

**Ms Harris**: You refer in paragraph 242, I’ll deal with it, I hope briefly, to the use of seclusion and long-term segregation.   That increases the need for contact doesn't it?    How often should a patient in seclusion have direct contact with a consultant?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So no informal patient is secluded.   There are -- there is a code of practice as the patients are detained and there are strict guidelines for code of practice in terms of what needs to happen.   The patient is under constant observation.   They have two-hourly nursing checks, four-hourly medical checks, there's an MDT first --

**Ms Harris**: The question was about the consultant contact?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Consultant has to see -- within first 12 hours the consultant has to see, so there is MDT review that needs to take place, that specific time specified in the code of practice.

**Ms Harris**: In long-term segregation?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Long-term segregation is -- there are, there are times specified in long-term segregation.   Long-term segregation is slightly different, in the sense that it is -- patients treated in segregated area, it is slightly different to secluding in a room.

**Ms Harris**: So how often should they have contact with a consultant?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I'm -- there -- I will have to get back to you on that one.

**Ms Harris**: Paragraph 165, you say that patients can request additional meetings with any member of the multi-disciplinary team.     How are patients told about that?   Are they told they can ask for a meeting at any time?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So on the ward there will be a display of the nurses that are present and the nurses identified for that particular patient.    So inpatients would approach staff on the ward, asking for more time or one to ones.

**Ms Harris**: We have touched on this or what the impact of staffing issues can be in relation to the holistic assessment. In your experience, have staff vacancies affected the inpatient pathway?    You have referred to difficulty with pharmacists, which we will come on to and some difficulties with psychological services.    Have there been staffing issues over the relevant period?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, in the past, there have been issues around -- and this safer staffing concept came from -- and that was around the minimum staff required to manage a ward safely, which has recently increased the number of minimum staff qualified from two to three.    But there have been pressures on inpatient wards, which is monitored by CQC as well.

**Ms Harris**: Can I jump, please, to psychological treatment.    At

paragraph 117, you say all patients, and we have looked

at this, have access to inpatient psychological

ward-based groups, and on paragraph 173, you list

treatments that are available.

You also refer to visible and available time.

What's that, please?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's a concept the Psychology Department introduced,

.. rst-class:: indented

where it is more about the patient being able to

.. rst-class:: indented

approach the psychologist and the psychologist being

.. rst-class:: indented

visible on the ward and available on the ward.

**Ms Harris**: Does that literally mean a psychologist present?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, it is about visibility of the staff.

**Ms Harris**: I mean, actually present, being on the ward?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Being on the ward.

**Ms Harris**: How has that changed as a concept over the relevant

period; is that something that's quite new?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is something new.

**Ms Harris**: How new?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I would say fairly recent.    We can get back to you on

.. rst-class:: indented

when it was introduced and started.

**Ms Harris**: What benefit does it have for patients on wards?    Move

visible and available time?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Being aware that there is a psychologist and

.. rst-class:: indented

psychological interventions can be provided and staff patients can access that support and intervention.

**Ms Harris**: I was about to say "what is availability of visible and available time", but at the moment in EPUT how is that working out in practice?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's an initiative by the Psychology Department it is a fairly recent initiative and I'm probably not well versed with all the aspects of that initiative.   I can get the Head of Psychology to provide more information on that intervention.

**Ms Harris**: The treatments you list, certainly at paragraph 172 include psychological and social interventions, and can I just ask this question: if a patient suffers from comorbid alcohol dependency or substance misuse issues would it be expected that they receive specific psychological and social interventions as part of their inpatient care plan?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Not necessarily.

**Ms Harris**: Why not?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The treatment of alcohol withdrawal and alcohol long term, you know, in terms of their motivation, these are services provided by specialist Drug & Alcohol Services, where patients' motivation is important.   Patients usually don't -- especially on adult wards, don't stay for a longer period and we do not have in reach on Drug & Alcohol Services on a ward.

.. rst-class:: indented

At one stage, Drug & Alcohol Services were provided by specialist mental health services.    Most of the Drug & Alcohol Services are now provided by third sector providers.

**Ms Harris**: Just returning to neurodiversity again.    During the course of the inpatient stay.    Can I just ask very quickly that paragraph 94 be put back up again, it is at page 1124.

You refer to the good practice document (MK2-240), on full assessments of potential neurodiversity, indicates it is a specialist and complex assessment, and you list the different healthcare professionals that should be involved.

Can I ask about the reality of that with a patient who has a neurodevelopmental condition or is presenting as consistent with that possibly.    How often would a full assessment with all those people take place?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's unlikely to take place.

**Ms Harris**: I mean, I was going to say, "What are the barriers?" but why is that unlikely?   You seem very clear on that.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's -- one is the resource.     As from my last, from yesterday's statement, a full assessment of autism can take place four of five hours.    It's a very cursory, small team, Autism Assessment Service, and the treatment, the care can be provided on a needs basis rather than a diagnosis.

.. rst-class:: indented

It's -- the question is whether you provide, whether you -- how important is a diagnosis of an autism to provide appropriate reasonable adjustments and care and treatment for someone with autism.

**Ms Harris**: Who provides it on the needs basis that you have just described?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's the ward team and the ward psychologists.

**Ms Harris**: The ward psychologist.

Medication for a moment, please.   At paragraph 106, we don't need to go to it now, but you may want to refer to it, you refer to patient information including information for medicines.   You say about medicines from GPs:

"Historically EPUT and predecessor organisations had no easy access to any of the GP information.   Over the last five to six years this has improved with the availability of Shared Care portal and other medicine reconciliation practices which came into effect in later years."

And it's right I think a medication reconciliation is comparing a patient's medication orders to all of the medications that the patient's been taking, it's matching them up to avoid errors?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: What processes has the Trust used or does the Trust use to ensure accuracy of medicines reconciliation?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the junior doctor at the time of writing a draft chart will do a medicines reconciliation, see with what medication the patient comes in and what is written on the -- on the records.

.. rst-class:: indented

He or she, if unsure, may not write all the medications and write the necessary medications.    The pharmacy department, the pharmacist, in reaching into the ward, would then do a thorough medicines reconciliation.

**Ms Harris**: I will come back to the pharmacy department in a moment. But, do you think there is excessive reliance on patients to tell the team about their medications?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So it depends what time the patient's been admitted as well.   If a patient is admitted in the middle of the night, either the information is with the patient or the medication the patients bring.   Sometimes patients come up with their community prescription chart, and some information will be on the clinical records, some information can be collected from the family as to what medication the patient's taking or is given.

.. rst-class:: indented

During working hours it is an option for the trainee doctor to contact the GP surgery and get that information if the patient, if he or she is unsure.

**Ms Harris**: What happens if the patient isn't able to help, because sometimes patients don't necessarily know all of the medication that they are taking, and records are difficult to get hold of, what happens then?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Psychiatric medications, they would write -- if a patient is presenting with a psychotic illness, they will start the patient on some anti-psychotic medication to manage the acute condition, but the next day a thorough reconciliation, medicines reconciliation can take place.

.. rst-class:: indented

So he may not -- the doctor may just write the medicines essential for that, until that information can be collected.

**Ms Harris**: At paragraphs 208-210 --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: And, sorry --

**Ms Harris**: Sorry.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Sorry.   And most of the psychiatric medications for depression they don't act straight away anyway. Anti-depressants take two weeks to act, so ...

**Ms Harris**: You deal with medication and reviews and discussion with the patients at your paragraphs 208-210 and you deal with reporting side-effects and so on.   What are the key areas, where are the key problem areas where incidents may arise in relation to medicines and medication?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Compliance is an issue, it can be an issue, it can be. Certain -- certain medications cannot be started in the community and require an inpatient, and beds are not always available.   These are planned admissions.

.. rst-class:: indented

The monitoring of certain medications, lithium or Clozapine needs to be done carefully.    There are certain guidelines now on medications, like sodium valproate, where patients need to be women of working age and men shouldn't be on sodium valproate.   So there is a monitoring for specific medications.

.. rst-class:: indented

On the ward, I would say the main issue would be on ensuring patients', the medicines reconciliation has been done and the -- and the compliance.    Patients may refuse to take medication.

**Ms Harris**: You have already touched on pharmacists and their role in reconciliation and your statement makes clear that they play an important role in the safe and effective delivery of pharmacological treatments.

Can I just ask some very brief questions mindful of the time.   You deal at your paragraphs 181-83 with the fact that there were significant vacancies in pharmacy staff.   It was in the corporate risk register certainly at one point?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: And that shortages were a national issue.   You say at 183 that recruitment appears to have improved over the last six months, and I think that your vacancy rates are listed at 9.9% in December.

You also state at 207 that in two years post-Covid, pharmacist vacancies rose dramatically and it's only in 2024 to 2025 that input to wards has started to return to pre-merger levels, that being 2017?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Can we understand the impact of all this, please.   What is the practical effect of the shortage of pharmacists on patient treatment and care?

Can I ask you about three?   Firstly, is it problematic in terms of contribution to the care plan for medication?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Not from the care plan.

**Ms Harris**: No.   What about from advice?   Is it problematic because --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is.

**Ms Harris**: -- people can't give advice on the right medications?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, that's true.

**Ms Harris**: Does it lead to problems, practical problems with dispensing, getting hold of the medication?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Can I just say the first point, when you talk about the medication drug charts, the pharmacist would in-reach on the wards and check the drug charts.    So that's an additional layer of safety just for prescribing.   So that is an important role which pharmacists play.

**Ms Harris**: So if we are short of pharmacists, that's a problem as well?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That would be affecting.

**Ms Harris**: So checking the drug charts, lack of advice, problems with dispensing?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Dispensing, to the best of my understanding from the head of pharmacy, that was never compromised.

.. rst-class:: indented

So they -- because of the shortage, they prioritised and focused on ensuring that the dispensing takes place.

**Ms Harris**: But does the reality, from what you have told us, mean that if there is a significant lack of pharmacists, there's a pharmacist crisis as was indicated, there is the potential for direct impact to patients by virtue of either not having the optimal medication or the right medication or --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the medication was provided at the time.     So dispensing wasn't affected.   It was the -- activities like research were stopped, the advice, that was affected and the pharmacists visiting the wards and checking the drug charts was affected.

**Ms Harris**: I am going to deal with just one or two questions about restrictive practices.

We have already -- let's just deal with observation levels.   We have already looked at I think paragraph 56 (h) which was the medical assessment and clerking.

As part of that, (h), just to remind those who saw it before, it was to agree an initial engagement and an observation plan with the patient, and at paragraph 62, you say:

"The nursing assessment will include agreeing the therapeutic engagement and support observation level in line with Trust policy."

At paragraph 2021, you say:

"Risk of harm will determine the type and frequency of observations that staff will undertake."

And at the end of that paragraph, you refer to MK229, which is a document entitled "Therapeutic Engagement and Supportive Observation Policy (Inpatients)".   Could we just put MK29 up, please, which is page 9542 or internal 1295.

This is a current document again.   Could we just look at various -- sorry.   Let me just get my ...

Can we go to page -- I think we may be already there, 12 -- yes, sorry.    You are already there.   Thank you.   Sorry.

Looking at 4.4.1, which is "Observation":

"Engagement and supportive observation calls for empathy and engagement combined with readiness to act. It provides an opportunity for staff to interact with the patient in a therapeutic way.    Supportive observation can increase understanding of the feelings and motivations of the patient to act in a particular way.    It can also offer the patient support and guidance in how to deal with those feelings and thoughts."

And you say there's a number of reasons why -- well, it says they may be need to be cared for or defined on higher engagement and supportive observation levels and the document lists the risk at 4.4.2.

Can we go to the next page, please, and just acknowledge this is the current document, that the next page sets out the levels of observation and I think we need to go over the page for that to be completed.

We see the four levels, is that right, the four levels of observation, beginning with "General observation", moving up to Level 4, which is "Continuous with arm's length".

Then can we go to 1299, Amanda, please, and 4.11 while we have the document up, please, and it goes over the page.     Can we see what it says about carers?   It will save us getting the document:

"Carers are an integral part of someone's care and risk assessment.    Carers will often be able to support professionals in telling them what the individual is usually like when well and how they best engage with others.    This brings a key opportunity for staff to better individualise care.       When the patient has given consent, the carer should be updated in a timely manner about the level of observations the patient is on and the rationale as to why.        The carer should be given the opportunity to give their view on this.       The carer should also be welcomed to review this level of observations with the MDT and patient themselves."

On the next page:

"This includes being able to discuss concerns when decisions are being made to downgrade a patient's observation levels, and to have their voices heard and listened to when practically possible.       In the absence of carer involvement, all patients should be aware of their right to have an independent mental health advocate or an independent mental capacity advocate."

In terms of agreeing observations, does this apply to all patients including those who have just been admitted to the ward?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right.    That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Is there a higher minimum observation level that all newly-admitted patients to acute wards must be placed on?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Most of the admissions, a patient will go on a Level 2 observation.

**Ms Harris**: What's the rationale for that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Especially when initially the ward sometimes, especially new patients, you are not aware the clinical presentation, you are not aware, you are still in the process of gathering information, understanding the patient and it is better to have a closer eye on the clinical presentation of the patient.

**Ms Harris**: What is the Trust policy or expected practice as to when and in what circumstances a decision can be taken to downgrade a patient's level of observations?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's a clinical decision.   If they -- the staff would aim to treat patients on the lowest level of admission -- observation, but these decisions have to be made at short notice quickly.    If someone is becoming aggressive, either harming themselves or damaging the ward, they have to be quickly put on a higher level of observation.

**Ms Harris**: My question was about downgrading.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Downgrading is again a clinical decision.    If the patient no longer poses a threat to himself or others, or the staff of the ward then they would be downgraded. We expect Level 3 and 4, which is, you know, higher-level of observations for a more senior person to undertake.   Whereas Level 2, even the nursing staff would downgrade the patient.     It usually is a multiple-disciplinary decision, MDT decision.

**Ms Harris**: I was going to ask you.      You say "usually" does it require authorisation from the MDT?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It doesn't require authorisation from the MDT. A consultant can make a decision and say that the patient can be downgraded to Level 2 or Level 3.

**Ms Harris**: We have looked --

**The Chair**: Sorry.   Can I just interrupt?

**Ms Harris**: Yes, of course.

**The Chair**: But Level 2 and Level 1 is a matter for the nursing staff I think you have said.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Or the other staff, or the junior doctor or the trainee doctor on the ward.

**The Chair**: Thank you.    Sorry.

**Ms Harris**: No, thank you very much, Chair, for clarifying that.

We see this is the current policy.      Are there any substantial differences, do you know, from previous policies?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The level of observations have, the four levels have been the same for a long time.      How it's implemented probably has changed with time, you know.

.. rst-class:: indented

The observation earlier was just an unqualified staff sitting with the patient to make sure the patient is safe.    There is now an expectation that the staff interacts with the patient rather than just observe the patient, and also I think some of the observations were now -- so the observations were done on paper and just a single phrase, if a patient is asleep, a patient is awake.

.. rst-class:: indented

But there's an expectation that the staff who are undertaking the assessed observation are engaging with the patient and making the most of that.   There are e-observations now been introduced in the organisation.

**Ms Harris**: I will come back to the therapeutic engagement in a moment because it's there.    But it's right to observe, I won't ask that we go back to it, that on the first page it says that in November 2023 this document had a comprehensive rewrite and it was renewed with focus, with renewed focus on engagement, lived experience contributions and leadership.   So it --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The durations have changed, I think.    I don't recall. But the number of hours (unclear) staff can or should undertake an observation was changed, the number of patients that can be observed by one particular staff was changed.   So acknowledging the fatigue and some of the issues that were coming at the time of staff sleeping, found sleeping on the observations.   So those I understand led to those changes being introduced.

**Ms Harris**: Therapeutic engagement is dealt with at paragraphs 221-242 of your statement and we have just seen, as I say, reference to it within the document we have just looked at.    How does the Trust monitor that there's been a sufficient level of therapeutic engagement in respect of the patients that have been subject to observation and restrictive practices?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's my understanding that it's sometimes difficult to monitor.   It'll depend upon the patient's clinical presentation and willingness to enter a conversation or a therapeutic activity.      A patient might just want to be left alone.    So it's difficult to give a -- get a qualitative aspect of, you know, how much therapeutic interaction there has been during the level of observation.   It is something that is now ...

.. rst-class:: indented

The focus and emphasis is on making the most of that opportunity to engage in some therapeutic activity.     It will depend upon a patient's involvement, engagement willingness as well.

**Ms Harris**: Just moving on to other restrictive practices.

You provide a list at 225-226.       In terms of blanket restrictions, can you give an example of a specific justification for a blanket restriction?     I appreciate that blanket restrictions are put in place often without justification as per the documentation.     But, can you give us an insight into how blanket restrictions were used over the relevant period?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So at one stage the -- when ward didn't have enough staff they would close the doors to the garden because they didn't have staff to monitor the patients when they were going within the gardens; that's a blanket restriction.   The CQC would monitor and wouldn't -- you know, would take an objection to that.    We expect that when the patients are in a garden area, they need to be observed and if that is not then the door is closed.

.. rst-class:: indented

That's an example of a blanket restriction or a closed door is another example.

**Ms Harris**: So you say the CQC would monitor that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The CQC would monitor it.

**Ms Harris**: In terms of searches, you have provided the current search policy, I am just going to move through, which I think is your MK2-30, which is at exhibit 6, 9607 or internal 1361.    It's paragraph 7.1, which says when a search can take place.     There is a separate protocol for secure services, isn't there?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: Let's just make that clear straight away.    A search can take place as part of the normal routine at the time of admission, will always take place.    Personal search and personal belongings.   On return from leave including short leave, recorded in the care plan and/or risk assessment, when staff suspect there is a risk to the service user themselves or others, and that's a search of the person, the search of personal property and sleeping areas.   A reactive search will be based on general concerns as a result of evidence or information obtained.   A reactive personal search will be based on specific information or evidence or when secluding a service user or the service user is placed into long-term segregation.

So this includes a statement that a search will always take place at the time of admission.   In your experience, are there any issues with compliance?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There shouldn't be.   The staff have to document all the articles and items the patients are coming to the ward with, so that would involve appropriate searches.

.. rst-class:: indented

The staff have to be aware of, you know, what are the likely items that the patient's coming with which might be used to self-harm.   So that is -- forms a part of the routine search on admission.

**Ms Harris**: It's clear from 7.2 that there are different as we say requirements for detained service users and if consent is refused, a service user is detained, then staff can consider continuing the search without consent.

But I think it's clear, isn't it, that consent is required from informal patients?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is required for informal -- it's required for -- I mean, it's good practice to take consent from any patient.   There are circumstances where they might have to undertake a search even if the patient's not consenting.   It's not a decision that's lightly, that should be taken lightly, but staff have responsibility for safety for that patient and for the other patients as well.   If there's a likelihood that the patient is bringing something which he shouldn't, he or she shouldn't, on the ward then they would contact the Ward Manager, senior person or the consultant and in order to ensure the safety of the person or the other patients, they would undertake that.

.. rst-class:: indented

If the patient is refusing that itself raises suspicion of why the patient is refusing.   There would always be two members of staff undertake that.    That search would be undertaken in a separate area and due process and procedure would be followed.

**Ms Harris**: In fact, in your paragraph 67, you say if a patient doesn't provide consent and has capacity and there is sufficient information to suggest risk, consent would be gained from the consultant.   How is risk determined in that situation?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's based on a patient's history.   Is this someone who has, on the previous occasions during leave, brought back substances?    His clinical presentation, you know. Pinpoint people.    In the case the person has probably taken opiates, some information, some clinical records from other patients.   So there are various sources which would indicate the likelihood of patients bringing something which he or she shouldn't.    So that risk assessment would be taken based on a number of factors.

**Ms Harris**: Is there guidance or training for staff about that and what constitutes sufficient information of risk?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There -- there is a policy and it's -- at that time I would -- it's a clinical decision, you know, how the patient is presenting and is the patient -- is he likely to be a risk to himself or others.     They have a duty of care.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask you about physical restraint.    You deal at your paragraph 227 with physical restraint and you say that physical intervention should not be used for any longer than necessary.

Are EPUT monitoring the extent to which these principles are being followed in the exercise of physical restraint and whether it is being used for the minimum duration?    Is there monitoring of that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So there is a range, there's a sort -- seclusion is definitely monitored because under the code of practice and CQC monitors as well.    The restraint, the other restraint, there are four aspects, I mean there are various aspects: whether it is necessary, whether it's proportionate, whether it is safe and whether it is done in a compassionate manner.

.. rst-class:: indented

The first three are easy to monitor.   There is a Datix form completed after each restraint, that Datix form is reviewed by a manager.    There is a Restrictive Practices Group, which oversee the trends and analysis. The question is how do you sort of monitor the compassion element of it?    That's -- and I think that's where there is fundamentals of care initiative and increasing the number of nurses on the ward so that they don't feel pressured and the compassion fatigue element of it, and all what we are doing to address that comes in.

.. rst-class:: indented

But the earlier three aspects are monitored and there is a specific group that looks at the restricted practices in the organisation.

**Ms Harris**: Does the monitoring include analysis of whether there is any correlation between the level of reliance on temporary or bank staff and the level of physical restraint, or are you not able to say?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I'm not sure how number of -- number of staff on the ward would impact on the decision to restrain or not. The decision to restrain is a -- is based on the patient's clinical presentation.   The number of staff on the ward doesn't mean that a patient will not be restrained or should be restrained.

**Ms Harris**: My question wasn't around the numbers, but around staff that are temporary or bank staff, unfamiliar --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Okay.   It's about the appropriateness of the restraint. Is that what you are referring to?    If the temporary staff they may not be -- they would -- there should be a TASID trained staff on each shift.   They would not undertake a restraint unless they are trained to undertake the restraint.    So whether you are temporary or permanent you need to be -- even if you are permanent, you need to have that training to restrain someone.

**Ms Harris**: Can I just ask you briefly about therapeutic and safe intervention and de-escalation procedure.   You say all staff are trained in it.    Is that an EPUT policy and procedure?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's an EPUT policy and procedure.

**Ms Harris**: Has it been in place throughout the relevant period?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: We can get back to you on our -- I -- they should be. There would be, as far as I remember, there would been restraint training and policies and procedures around how to restrain.

**Ms Harris**: How is the training provided by EPUT to its staff?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There is a TASID training that forms -- it's a part of that, you know, because it starts with using non-restraining procedures, you know, de-escalation processes and so forth as -- depending on the clinical presentation.   So that's part of the TASID training.

**Ms Harris**: Is it face to face or online?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It is face to face.

**Ms Harris**: And how is it assessed that staff members have done the training and completed the training and are now able to carry it out on the ward appropriately?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There -- it doesn't -- once trained doesn't mean that you are trained forever.     I think that you need regular updates of the TASID training, on the training.

**Ms Harris**: Does it include all ward staff?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It includes, TASID training should be provided to all ward staff.

**Ms Harris**: You said you would get back to us as to when it was within the period.    Do you think it was a similar policy, or was that the situation at NEPT and SEPT?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I remember being a trainee undergoing this training.    So I am sure in most of the -- and I was -- I'm not talking about EPUT here.   So TASID training, some form of control and restraint training has been there in mental health services for a long period of time.

.. rst-class:: indented

The Trust should be able to provide more information on the duration of these trainings, how long these trainings have been there.

**Ms Harris**: Chair, I'm mindful of the time and it may be possible to go a little bit further, although I am not entirely sure if we will complete all of my questions or whether this might be a convenient moment and then review and return for a short period of time at 2.00 to complete Dr Karale and any other matters that arise before moving to this afternoon's evidence.

In terms of timing, that would still ensure we finish within the normal Inquiry's sitting hours.

**The Chair**: Would it be helpful if we had a slightly shorter lunch perhaps came back at 1.50?

**Ms Harris**: Certainly, if that's acceptable to others. I see nodding and Dr Karale knows he may need to be back this afternoon.

**The Chair**: Fine.    Okay, we will break now until 1.50.

*(1.03 pm)*

*(The Short Adjournment)*

*(1.50 pm)*

**The Chair**: Ms Harris.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you, Chair.    Good afternoon.

Dr Karale, mindful of the time, and also a number of your responses which indicate that the Inquiry may now be better placed to make requests of other persons for information and documentation, what I am now going to do is ask you just about various topics within your statement for a short time before we have a break to see if anything else has arisen.

I remind you and the record, of course, that everything within your statement is evidence that has been presented and will be taken into account by the Inquiry.

Can I pick up on an entirely separate topic.   I am going to leave restrictive practices behind now and move to the question of risk management.   You begin the question of risk management or the issue of risk management at paragraph 258 of your statement and as you said repeatedly in various ways yesterday risk is viewed by the Trust as being dynamic and multidimensional.

What was the core inpatient document at the relevant time which the staff working at EPUT would be expected to consult to inform themselves of a patient's key current and historic risk factors?    What would they look at?   Would it be the initial 72-hour care plan or a risk assessment plan?   Where would they go for that information?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The clerking notes by the junior doctor would have some information on the risks and the risk management.     The CPA care plan would have information on the risk and risk management.

**Ms Harris**: In paragraph 258 you make reference to the concept of positive risk taking and for the record it's something you refer to in paragraph 133.     What do you mean by positive risk taking?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's the concept which Dr Davidson mentioned about therapeutic balance between therapeutic care and the risk.   When we can -- the idea of giving patient leave is part of the treatment, leave is a part of the treatment, but leave also brings certain risks when the patient goes out of the ward.     The ward has very little control over what happens outside.

.. rst-class:: indented

So that's what I mention about positive risk taking. So you do give leave, you don't stop leave because a patient might harm, but you take into consideration, you know, what are the factors.     It's -- is it the right time to give leave?     Is the patient recovered enough to start having some leave?      But you put in some safeguards.   You start with an escorted leave, then accompanied leave and then unescorted leave.        So that's positive risk taking.

**Ms Harris**: At paragraph 265 you state that managing risk and ensuring therapeutic care, which I think is what you have just referred to, is getting the balance right to ensure that the recovery process is maintained for the patient.

What do you think or where do you think, I should say, EPUT and the predecessor trusts have been in terms of the balance struck between risk management and avoidance and therapeutic care over the relevant period? What has the approach been overall?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's always been a clinical decision.    It's always a clinical decision based on the mental state, how much a patient has recovered to decide whether it's the right time to give leave or not.   It rests with the consultant.

.. rst-class:: indented

For patients who are under the Mental Health Act there is a formal responsibility of a consultant.      They have to -- the leave is granted on what is called a section 17, it's a formal leave.    And likewise for patients who are informal it's the consultant, with the MDT, who decide what is the best time to start giving patient leave.

**Ms Harris**: That deals with leave specifically.   But what was the Trust's approach overall to risk management versus balancing it up with therapeutic care?    Has it changed, evolved over time?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: We heard from Dr Davidson that there was a preoccupation with the risk assessments in the health sector and health services and if things would go wrong, the first thing that would be asked in an internal investigation is, "Has the risk assessments been done?"

.. rst-class:: indented

What is the nature and the quality of risk assessment is a different matter.   And I think more recently nationally it's been recognised the impact this had on the mental health services and that applies to the services in Essex as well.   Move away from filling forms and focusing on therapeutic care.

**Ms Harris**: You say it's now the focus in Essex.   Was there or is there anything now in place to prevent or to move away from an overfocus on risk management over providing therapy?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The new operating model makes it clear.   We are not talking about safety plans as mentioned by Dr Davidson rather than, you know, risk management plans and that takes into account the strengths of the patient, the support system he or she has and what help the person, the patient can seek when on leave if he or she needs help and assistance.   And also the therapeutic activities that are on the ward are more focused on therapeutic care, providing the activity coordinators that have been recently appointed, the peer support workers; they are all meant to increase the therapeutic milieu on the ward.

**Ms Harris**: Yesterday you gave some evidence about the community mental health framework and in paragraph 280 of your statement you refer to the CPA in the section of your statement dealing with care plans.     You gave evidence about the proposed move away from the CPA.

As far as you are concerned or aware, does the introduction of the CHF at EPUT have any implications for care planning and the role or the use of care plans in inpatient admissions?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So for the inpatient services there are certain other set of recommendations, which I think Dr Davidson talked about the 10 key essential, and that's been very much a part of the new operating model of creating new roles like peer support workers and how do we involve families, family support workers.     72-hour discharge and 48-hour discharge, the red to green is again part of that 10 working principles.

.. rst-class:: indented

So inpatient, yes, we have start -- we have taken the guidance that's been -- that's come out nationally.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask this question.      Both now and as proposed, who is responsible for the care plans?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Care plans, it's usually nurses who prepare the care plans.   There's a slight distinction between a treatment plan and a care plan.    The care plan -- a treatment plan is where a doctor on the ward will decide what the diagnosis is, what the medication, what the psychological treatments, any treatments for any other medical conditions like diabetes and at the point of discharge what medications the patients should go on.

.. rst-class:: indented

When you talk about care plan it involves housing, spiritual needs.   It's a more overall document including all aspects of care, which is predominantly completed by nursing staff.

**Ms Harris**: A slightly separate question.   In paragraph 293 of your statement, you say that the MDT will consider any trauma a patient has experienced to obtain a better understanding of the patient's care needs.

How do the MDT inform themselves of that past trauma, especially given the issues we have heard about with accessing patient records sometimes?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There is a lot of focus on trauma-informed care now. The Trust has a transformation project rolling out trauma-informed care.    It is about the trauma a person experienced in his own life.

.. rst-class:: indented

The patient might have had admission to that particular ward and might have had a not-so-good experience and how that impacts on that.    So that's all -- it's led by the Psychology Department.    So it's an ongoing programme of making all services trauma informed and trauma aware.

**Ms Harris**: But how do they find out about the previous trauma?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's history taking, information -- gathering

.. rst-class:: indented

information, talking to the families.

**Ms Harris**: Talking to the families, did you say?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: So key information from the families?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: Moving on, as I said --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Wherever possible.

**Ms Harris**: Wherever possible?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Wherever possible.

**Ms Harris**: Mindful of the time, can I just ask you some questions

about discharge and follow up bearing in mind you have

set out a lot of information within your statement which

begins at paragraphs 295.

What is the role of the discharge coordinator?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The role of the discharge coordinator is to ensure that

.. rst-class:: indented

any obstacles to discharges are addressed at the

.. rst-class:: indented

beginning of the admission itself.    It is to ensure that

.. rst-class:: indented

patients, once they are medically optimised in the sense

.. rst-class:: indented

they are -- they are well enough to be discharged, that

.. rst-class:: indented

they don't land up staying on the ward for aftercare

.. rst-class:: indented

arrangements.

**Ms Harris**: What is the professional background of the discharge

coordinator usually?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Usually they have been nursing staff.    So every -- all ward has a Band 6.   Each ward has for other services we have -- each locality has one and the two assessments have.   But more recently we have gone for wider professions, so it could be someone from a housing background who understands, you know, what could be the housing-related barriers to discharge.

**Ms Harris**: So all manner of professionals could be a discharge --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: More recently.

**Ms Harris**: By "more recently", when do you mean?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I think because it was traditionally -- this is the Time to Care approach.    So prior to Time to Care was introduced, the discharge coordinators were nurses.

**Ms Harris**: If the discharge coordinator is somebody who is responsible for housing or accommodation or from a different agency, how does that work in practice?    How do they attend meetings, facilitate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They are not responsible as such.    They are, I think, facilitators.    They will identify where the blockage is and identify those blockages and help the team to address those blockages.     Earlier, it was only reliant on the care coordinator to address any issues outside the ward.

.. rst-class:: indented

So if the patient required a placement, it was incumbent on the care coordinator to fill the relevant forms, take it to the panel but now with -- with the activity, with the discharge coordinators, there is that greater support to plan, to identify obstacles and plan the aftercare.

**Ms Harris**: Your statement at paragraphs 535 and then on from 539 to 545, which I won't go to, appear to set out a number of challenges faced by discharge coordinators.    You say in your statement that discharge coordinators are present at most discharge planning meetings.    But yet at paragraph 539, you say that, due to a limited team capacity, the team currently engages with more complex discharges, rather suggesting that they can only come to certain patient cases, if that makes sense.

What is the position?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So they -- they personally were involved in certain patients, not every but they would have -- and this is going forward I am talking about, this is more recent -- that every patient admitted, the discharge coordinator will complete -- undertake a review and identify the barriers to discharge but would not personally get involved in each and every patient.    They might identify two or three patients where there are likely to be more complexities in discharging and then get personally involved.

**Ms Harris**: You say this is going forward, is this an area, to use a word we have used a few times during your evidence -- this is an area where your evidence may be considered aspirational to a certain extent?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Rather than aspirational, this has been introduced through the new operating model and the Time to Care, so a number of these posts have been appointed, the roles have been set.

.. rst-class:: indented

What I refer to as these services were not available a few years ago.

**Ms Harris**: You say at 543 that the discharge coordinators are likely to benefit from the implementation of the new operating model and the multiple workstreams that are ongoing.   What do you mean by that and how will they be benefited?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So there are -- the -- it -- there -- the focus on, say, focus on housing or there are other roles like activity coordinators, and others that would work as a part of the team in assisting the discharge coordinators.

.. rst-class:: indented

The new -- the new operating model focuses on keeping patients no longer than what's required, that's the main focus and that focuses and that's the whole number of new appointments have been made, peer support workers, family support workers, so it's about how these people can work with families and patients and it's a team effort, so the focus is on -- so they are not working in isolation, I think that's probably what's being mentioned there.

**Ms Harris**: Is there any standardised template or best practice guidance, or was there, setting out what at a minimum a discharge plan must contain?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: A minimum discharge plan will have -- discharge somebody is an example, will have the diagnosis.

**Ms Harris**: I don't want to cut across you but was there a template or any guidance as to what -- you are giving your view of what it should contain, in your experience, but was there --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I think there is a template for discharge summary which will have the treatment plan with the aftercare arrangements.

**Ms Harris**: Would that be an EPUT template?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That would be an EPUT template.

**Ms Harris**: Do you agree at discharge that a crisis plan is also of fundamental importance?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: You talked about the blockages and you talked about the aim being to have a patient or keep a patient for as little time as possible on the ward.   You mention issues with accommodation, for example, within your statement.

Is it ever appropriate, do you consider, to discharge a patient prior to having settled arrangements as to their accommodation, because your statement, at paragraphs 310 to 311 suggests that adults -- adults -- may be discharged where accommodation is not finalised?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So there are patients detained, Section 3, where there is a statutory responsibility under Section 117 to provide aftercare and make those arrangements.    Patients who are admitted informally, I would say every effort would be made to identify accommodation but, if a patient is being kept on the ward and that stay on the ward has been detrimental, there are alternative arrangements occasionally made, they would liaise with the patients and families, are they willing to stay with the family member or some temporary arrangements can be made until a more permanent solution can be found.

.. rst-class:: indented

Keeping patients on a long -- on the ward for a long period also has its disadvantages.

**Ms Harris**: That leads me, perhaps, to the notice of discharge, the 48-hour notice period.   This Inquiry has heard accounts of people who have been discharged without their family being aware.   If the system is working as intended and there's no issues of patients withholding consent, does it follow that a patient support network should know at least two days before that their relative or loved one is being discharged?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the 48 follow-up is --

**Ms Harris**: No, this isn't the follow-up, this is the 48 notice?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.    48 is not always possible.

.. rst-class:: indented

We would -- discharges would be discussed during the ward reviews and patients would be informed you are likely to be discharged in next week or -- but there might be times when patients would say, if I am well enough now to be discharged, why do you want to keep me for 48 hours.     When patients are on the ward for a long duration, yes, but when patients have had a brief admission there is also how do you manage the pressure -- the home treatment team might say, as an early discharge, we are happy to look after the patient, now, and if the patient agrees, the family agrees, we would go for an early discharge with the rest of the treatment being provided in the community through the home treatment team.

.. rst-class:: indented

So home treatment team also has a function of early discharge -- facilitating early discharge, which means that patients could be discharged and it's -- so long -- patients who have been for a longer period and who are on -- on section, they would be 117 pre-discharge meeting, a date would be agreed.     But for briefer admissions, following a clinical review, the patient may agree or the team may agree for a discharge.

**Ms Harris**: You have already mentioned the follow-up.     Let me ask you about that.     At paragraph 324 of your statement, you say:

"EPUT participated in the initial NHSE pilot which set the 48-hour post-discharge target and, as such, EPUT have maintained the ambition for post-discharge follow-up to be completed within 48 hours."

You explain that that period starts at midnight on the day of discharge.

Some specific questions, if I may.   When was the pilot implemented?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Can you take me to the paragraph?

**Ms Harris**: It is 324.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So the target is a 72-hour target and there was some specific guidance that came out nationally that, for those patients who were admitted following episode of self-harm or were at risk, they should be followed up earlier, 48 hours.   EPUT implemented that for all the patients, irrespective of whether they were admitted following self-harm or admitted following a risk to themselves, and that has been continued since then.

**Ms Harris**: So my question was when?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Hard for me to remember the exact date but it has been there for a few years.

**Ms Harris**: You say that EPUT have maintained the ambition.   So what is the status then of the ambition and the 48-hour target, since the pilot has come to an end?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: We monitor the 48 hours, rather than the 72 hours.

**Ms Harris**: I would like to move now, before we end, to some further questions about involvement of the patient and the patient's support network.   We have touched on it as we have gone through but I just want to focus on one or two matters.

Just by way of reference, I am not going to ask that they be put up, paragraph 47 we have looked at how information is shared with the patient and, where appropriate, their chosen carers, and that's the information on arrival on the ward and we will come to the carers' support leaflet in a moment.

In paragraph 51, you talk about welcome information being made available to patients and their carers. Paragraph 70, when you are dealing with action, certainly that needs to be agreed by the MDT that information must be conveyed to the patient and, where possible, appropriate relative and carers.

I think you agreed yesterday that, whilst a patient might not consent for their family and carers to receive information, turning onto the other side, that doesn't stop the family sharing information about the patient --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: -- and that is key: I think we touched on a number of areas where it's almost always key to take information from families?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Absolutely.

**Ms Harris**: How are families made aware that they may share information that will assist the patient's care; how are they encouraged?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The families are invited to the ward rounds and now we also have family support workers who would link -- liaise with the family.      But it's been a standard practice to invite family members to ward rounds.       Can I just -- on my earlier statement, Chair, I am confident that seven-day follow up is monitored by the organisation, 48 hours to the best of my understanding is monitored.    But I cannot, with full assurance say that that is the case.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask, please, that we put up your MK-12, which is at 9094 of the main bundle, or in the internal pdf numberings I think it is 848.

Thank you.    So this is the carer support guide.     We will look at some of what it says in a moment.     How long have carers been provided with the leaflet or a leaflet like the one we have at MK-12?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I am not sure about the leaflet but carer's assessment has been part the mental health services for a long time particularly in community.      There was a drive many years ago to increase the number of carer's assessments offered to the carers and most of the organisations prioritised the -- and that was being monitored of how many carer's assessments had been offered to the carers. In regarding to the specific leaflet and document, I am not certain.

**Ms Harris**: To be clear, we can look at it in a minute, the production date of this leaflet says it is December 2024, so this is obviously a very recent version, it is on the very final page which we can look at in a moment.

**The Chair**: Bottom right corner, it says 27/01/2025.

**Ms Harris**: That may be when it was printed out.   I haven't got it up but Amanda, forgive me, if we could go to 852 internally, I think I was looking there at the bottom.

Dr Karale, do you see it says production 2024?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: 2024.

**Ms Harris**: So it may be it was then distributed or printed shortly thereafter, Chair, but that is just an assumption on my part.

Can we just have a look at what it says, please, about carers' rights and involvement, especially at discharge.   Amanda could we go back to 849 internally, please.

Just to summarise, for the most part, it's a document signposting where carers can find support and what their rights are, and it lists, as we can see, lots of organisations that can support carers and who would be, you know, classed as a carer.   But if we look at the bottom right-hand side, we see from "Discharge from hospital", we see there is some specific information:

"When a person is admitted to a mental health hospital ..."

It may be a bit small but I will read it.    It is in the bottom right-hand corner of that page.   I will carry on reading it:

"When a person is admitted to a mental health hospital, the engagement and active participation of the person and their carers is central to the delivery of care and the planning of a successful discharge."

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: So it is the bottom right-hand corner but I will carry on reading, it is a difficult format, this document.

"Patients and their carers must be kept fully informed by the allocated key worker [and you have told us about the key worker] within the hospital who will work together with the multidisciplinary team to develop and agree an appropriate care plan, taking into account the needs of the patient and their carer's wishes".

It is very, very much elevating there the input from the carer.   I don't think I will be popular but can we go to the following page and look at the top left-hand side in relation to "Discharge".   It says:

"Discharge planning is a continuous process which should begin at the point of admission, ensuring that patients and their carers understand and are able to participate in care decisions."

Again this is a leaflet for carers:

"The hospital discharge process must not put the patient or their carer at risk of harm and must not create a situation whereby the independence of the carer or the sustainability of their caring role is jeopardised.   Carers should be involved in decision-making from the beginning and those involved in coordinating a discharge should not assume that a carer will necessarily be able or willing to continue in a caring role."

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: "Although patients in general have no right to remain in hospital when their medical needs no longer deem this necessary, their carers cannot be compelled to provide care in order to facilitate a discharge."

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: So that leaflet, albeit very new, emphasises the importance, doesn't it, not only of the involvement of the carer but understanding the reality of the carer's position, should a patient be discharged.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's a common practice.    It's not uncommon for patients who have had difficult relationships with the families, for either the patient refusing to go back or the family saying that better alternative arrangements need to be made.

**Ms Harris**: Was there any Trust-specific guidance or protocol in place in the relevant period about the communication or how communication should be undertaken or how families or carers should be engaged?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I think it was a common practice to invite family members for board reviews and ward rounds, and it is understood that one cannot compel or force anyone to take anyone or look after them and it is the responsibility of the discharging unit to ensure that patient is safely discharged to a particular place.

**Ms Harris**: When a patient has consented to sharing of information, so that is perhaps a more straightforward position, is it expected practice that they should be involved in any review of the patient's level observations and their views accounted for, and we looked at the observations, you will recall, before lunch, where it said that carers should be consulted?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So there are cases and there was a case that was brought to the Quality Committee where there is a prior planning, where the family has been involved, should the patient deteriorate, that this should be the plan, but many a time the reality is that it is very difficult when a decision has to be made to increase the escalation -- observation levels or seclude a patient, that immediately the family can be contacted prior to the incident, with the expectation that you have dealt with the situation on the ward and then contacted the family.

**Ms Harris**: On a similar note, when things go wrong, what policies were in place in relation to informing the patient's nearest relative or significant others about Serious Untoward Incidents concerning the patient?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There is a duty of candour policy.   There is a professional duty of candour and there is an obligatory or legal duty of candour when serious incidents happen -- occur, the serious incident team will offer a formal statutory response -- will fulfil the statutory responsibility but it is also incumbent on the professions under their professional bodies to -- to be open and honest under the duty of candour.    So there is -- in short, there is a policy for that.

**Ms Harris**: There is a policy.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: Did staff receive any training about how to communicate these types of incidents with relatives and loved ones?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Training on duty of candour, we will probably have to get that information from the training department.

**Ms Harris**: Perhaps the question --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It's not a formal training, I would say.   There is no, it's not on our training register, I am not aware of -- there's any formal duty of candour training.

**Ms Harris**: Perhaps I should make it clearer.   Not necessarily training impressing upon them that they must be open and honest but training on how to communicate sensitively what is likely to be very bad or unfortunate -- bad in the most tragic circumstances or, in other circumstances, very difficult news?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So when, when such incidents occur, there is a family liaison officer appointed, and these family liaison officers would -- are trained in sharing that information with the families.   I am not entirely sure about the professionals, whether there is a training -- such training for them.

**Ms Harris**: Sorry to go back to discharge but, just in terms of the crisis plan, you acknowledge that that was key at discharge.   Do you agree that carers or families should be involved in the development of the crisis plan, particularly as they are named -- they may have been identified as the persons who will support in terms of crisis?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They are involved in supporting, yes, they should be involved in --

**Ms Harris**: I think the paragraph 301, you actually use the word "co-producing" in relation to the discharge plan?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: That's what it should be, should it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It should, where possible, yes.

**Ms Harris**: There are, I anticipate, circumstances where a chosen carer raises concerns or objections to a discharge plan. What's the process in those circumstances?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: One would expect a treating team to meet with the family and listen to their concerns and try to address their concerns.   There is -- there can be a disparity in expectations as well.     The treating team might feel that they have medically optimised the patient and the patient is ready to discharge, but the family may disagree and be concerned.

.. rst-class:: indented

And it's the question of: how do we address those concerns?    How do you reassure the family and reassure the team themselves that the discharge is a safe discharge?   There could be difference of opinion between the families and the treating team.

**Ms Harris**: Do you acknowledge -- or does EPUT acknowledge, I should say -- that concerns have been raised by coroners and in inquests about the fact that views of carers were either not being listened to or being ignored?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I am aware of it and probably the appointment of the family support workers is one of the initiatives to address the concerns that were raised around the involvement of family.

**Ms Harris**: Finally this from me, and I am referring to your paragraph 288, you say and you refer to EPUT introducing the international fundamentals of care framework, which you have referred to in giving your evidence, and you have provided a slideshow about it, and you say:

"... which emphasises the importance of nurses and other healthcare professionals developing trusting therapeutic relationships with patients, their families and carers.   It also emphasises patients' psychosocial needs."

Would you say that there were aspects of that care that were missing previously?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The care -- nursing care became task oriented, so whether the NEWS2 has been done, or whether this particular task has been completed, and how do we ensure that the nurse or any staff member fully understands the patient, is aware of the history, and not just a task that has been allocated to that nurse or a staff member for that day, and the whole fundamentals of care is about taking their pride back in nursing and knowing the patient, rather than just being there on that day to perform the tasks that have been allocated to you.

**Ms Harris**: Dr Karale, that's all I have to ask you, unless, Chair, you have any questions at this time?

**The Chair**: I just want to ask one quick one about what you have just said about the fundamentals of care and the need to establish again --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Therapeutic relationship.

**The Chair**: -- a therapeutic relationship.     Is that something that you think that the Healthcare Support Worker is able to do, as well as the Registered Nurse?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Absolutely.   The only difference is Healthcare Support Workers may not have a good understanding of the psychiatric presentation, where you would expect the qualified nurse to have a better understanding of the clinical presentations.     But Healthcare Support Workers should also be part of that building therapeutic relationship with the patient.

**The Chair**: Is that something that a Healthcare Support Worker will be trained to do?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They should be trained to do it.     This is a rollout of this programme, starting with the nursing team.

.. rst-class:: indented

I take your point, Chair, about the importance of getting the support workers trained in the fundamentals of care.

**The Chair**: That has not yet happened but it will happen?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I am not certain about it.     It's a programme that's

.. rst-class:: indented

being led by a Chief Nurse, so I am not very close to

.. rst-class:: indented

the programme.

**The Chair**: Okay.   Thank you.

**Ms Harris**: May I suggest a 10-minute break to see if

anything else arises and then we will come back in

10 minutes' time.

**The Chair**: Yes, 10 minutes.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you, Chair.

*(2.30 pm)*

*(A short break)*

*(2.50 pm)*

**The Chair**: Ms Harris.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you, Chair.

There are just a few additional questions,

Dr Karale, and, by the nature of them, we may jump

around a little bit.

In relation to bed management, you give evidence

that the Trust uses a tool called Smart Tool to say how

many patients are waiting in the community.     Can data

for the relevant period be captured via that tool and,

if so, would it be data that could be provided to the

Inquiry?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.    The summary is provided to the Executive Team on a weekly basis, so either that or the information from the tool itself should be -- could be provided.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask you a little bit about neurodiversity training.   You will recall I asked you about what Part 2 of the Oliver McGowan training comprises.   You told us, I think, it was a one-day, face-to-face session.    Have you yourself undertaken that training?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I -- my -- I'm due in June, so we have been allocated dates because of the timing.   So I have a date that's been allocated to me to undertake that training, which is in June this year.

**Ms Harris**: Because I think you told us yesterday you still do one clinical session a week; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's right, yes.   So I have done my Part 1 training and I am due for my part 2.

**Ms Harris**: When dealing with the question of reasonable adjustments for patients with neurodivergent conditions earlier, you referred to the fact that aids might be provided, such as headphones to assist with noise in the ward.    Are aids such as that offered to all patients experiencing difficulties or only patients who require them or ask for them for reasonable adjustments?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: I would say it is on a needs basis.    So if a patient does require something to calm the environment down, those -- that would be provided.

**Ms Harris**: I think the question really is: do you offer them or do you wait to be asked?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: It would be part of the -- rather than being asked it would be part of their -- their treatment plan or care plan.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask you about what have been described as drug-induced behaviours and those which are unconnected but complicate the presentation.   Do practices differ between staff when distinguishing between drug-induced behaviours and different behaviours that are unconnected but complicate the position?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They -- no, I think the drug-induced psychosis is a term where now it is seen as the user of drugs has precipitated a psychotic illness, the episode still needs to be treated, as any other psychotic illness. The challenges subsequently are the work undertaken to reduce the likelihood of that patient going back to the use of drugs.

**Ms Harris**: Do staff follow any clinical guidance and best practice in that task?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There are NICE guidelines on management of psychosis.

**Ms Harris**: Yes, I think you attached them to your statement, in fact?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: Is that your answer, that that's --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes.

**Ms Harris**: How is this position impacted by the evidence you gave earlier that most drug and alcohol services are now delivered by third-sector organisations?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: So that doesn't involve the acute treatment, detoxifications or the treatment of the secondary complication, so, you know, if mental illness is resulting from use of alcohol.      What I meant was around long-term abstinence, motivation, harm minimisation, those are provided.

.. rst-class:: indented

It has impacted.   It was easier when you had a single organisation providing both aspects of care but mental health services have moved from there.

**Ms Harris**: Is there a risk that the presentations or the two presentations are misdiagnosed?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: No, so they're two -- so acute condition -- mental illness health and acute conditions would be treated. The drug and alcohol services are unlikely to treat acute mental illness.      There used to be what is called dual diagnosis services, at one stage, where they would look after patients who had mental illness and substance misuse but now the substance -- the mental illness aspect is looked after by the mental health services, especially during an acute episode and the long-term management of harm minimisation and abstinence from alcohol and drugs is managed by the drug and alcohol services in the community.

**Ms Harris**: Can I ask questions about the sexual safety and staffing.   You said it would be difficult to staff female wards with female staff used to recruit.   Are patients always searched by members of the same sex?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Patients, yes.

**Ms Harris**: Can you clarify what you meant: you gave evidence that there was no science behind the date of discharge and that this is something to focus the mind of the patient.

What did you --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The staff, sorry.

**Ms Harris**: Focus the mind of the staff?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Staff because what you want to do, as a staff member, is to not keep the patient longer than that's required, and if the task can be done today -- and that's the whole concept of red and green days and an expected date of discharge, that let's not delay the treatment, the expected date of discharge is four weeks, these are the tasks we need to complete within four weeks to get the patient ready for discharge.   Rather than a patient is admitted on the ward, let's continue the treatment, no matter how long it is going to take, and then start thinking about where the patient gets discharged.

.. rst-class:: indented

So it just -- as I mentioned, it is -- it's easier for briefer admissions.    For more complex patients, it's difficult to establish the date of discharge at the time, but that's reviewed regularly.

**Ms Harris**: The Inquiry is aware of situations in which voluntary patients have discharged themselves from inpatient wards, apparently against medical advice.    When the patient self-discharges against medical advice, should a discharge plan, including the crisis plan to which we have referred, nonetheless be implemented?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Absolutely.

**Ms Harris**: Should that include urgent consideration, given the circumstances, and incorporation of any carers' views?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: When a patient is discharging against medical advice, it will be slightly different when a planned discharge, where you are inviting the family members.    The aspect of communicating to family, where possible, also should -- the discharging against medical advice should not be treated different to discharge with patient's consent -- with medical -- as a planned discharge.

.. rst-class:: indented

So the patient will have the medications, will have a discharge summary, GP will be informed, all the aspects of the aftercare arrangements and aftercare treatment should be offered, as they are offered to any other patient.

**Ms Harris**: But my question was around consideration of carers' views, particularly if a patient has taken themselves out of the inpatient facility.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: If a patient at 8.00 in the evening says "I want to leave the ward and I am not even willing to wait for you", and that's how you manage the situation, you would -- if the patient is amenable for the junior doctor to come and talk to the patient, get involvement of the family, yes, that should be the practice.    If the patient is at risk, then the option is for staff to consider whether withholding -- holding the patient under the powers of the Mental Health Act are applicable.

.. rst-class:: indented

But, otherwise, if the patient wants to leave, it's very difficult to stop an informal patient if there are no risks, and then you would then liaise with, you know, the formal process.

**Ms Harris**: For the discharge plan and crisis plan?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's true.

**Ms Harris**: Do you have -- or does EPUT, sorry, have -- any policy or procedures in place to manage discharge against medical advice?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: There is guidance for discharging against medical advice.   If it's not a policy in itself, I am aware that it's been -- it's included in some, some parts of the policy, a component of the policy.   But there is guidance on discharging against medical advice and what needs to happen.

**Ms Harris**: That is no doubt something we could add to the list of things that you will provide to the Inquiry?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Absolutely.

**Ms Harris**: In terms of accommodation, when a person is discharged, in terms of a person that has been detained under the Mental Health Act, is it your understanding that responsibility for suitable care and accommodation, in those cases, lies with the local authority?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, under Section 117 of the aftercare arrangements, yes.

**Ms Harris**: But, sorry, the questions I asked earlier were in relation to informal -- that is a patient that was detained under section; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: In respect of information relied on for the purposes of pre-admission assessment, to what extent should that include multi-agency information gathering, such as information from primary healthcare services, police, criminal justice services, where the patient has been open to those services?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: For the assessments under the Mental Health Act, the AMHP would usually do that.   It is quite clear in the code of practice to gather information from all -- wherever it is possible.

**Ms Harris**: What about informal?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: An informal -- based on the availability of the information and the person undertaking that assessment, if the assessment is undertaken, is taking place at home with the crisis response service, they would talk to the family.   You would expect them to talk to the family.

.. rst-class:: indented

GP information: how easy is it to contact general practitioners.    The information through the portal is available, the primary care information is available. So the idea is that, before seeing a patient one should gather as much information as possible from as many sources available through its carers, through the residential care, the placement the patients are staying, or others involved in the care.

**Ms Harris**: In terms of mixed-sex wards, on a mixed-sex ward what measures or safeguards are in place to ensure that patients remained within their allocated area and, in relation to that, are staff trained or expected to have recourse to restrictive practices if one patient attempts to enter the opposite sex wing?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Sorry I am not entirely clear on your question.

**Ms Harris**: So we have dealt with mixed-sex wards.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: That's correct.

**Ms Harris**: I asked two questions together, I thought they may link but forgive me if they don't.    First of all, what measures or safeguards are in place to stop mixing in a mixed-sex ward?   You have talked about the separate areas the separate wings, you have described that to us.

So, first of all, what is done to prevent that and, if a member of one sex tries to enter the other wing, so to speak, are staff trained or expected to have recourse to restrictive practices to prevent that happening?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Yes, it will depend on the clinical presentation.     If it is safe to, then treat that -- if someone is entering a female -- because he is very unwell and he is manic then it needs to be addressed that particular way of treating his condition.     He may not necessarily require restraining or -- but staff would stop the patient from entering the female-only area.

**Ms Harris**: Can I just go back to care plans and the extent to which inpatient care plans identify and support social and economic determinants of mental ill health, given their relevance.   Would it be expected that the nurse responsible for an inpatient's care plan would liaise with other agencies involved in a patient's community care to formulate relevant care plans?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Where possible, she should -- the nurse should.

**Ms Harris**: Who is responsible in accordance with national or local Trust policy for the ownership of the inpatient care plan?   I asked you about who was responsible for it: is it the named nurse or another member of the MDT?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The named nurses responsible for drafting and writing the care plan.   It's an MDT response, it is a responsibility shared by the multidisciplinary team.

**Ms Harris**: So there is no single individual who's in charge of it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The Ward Manager and the Matron have overall responsibility of day-to-day running and the care planning of -- on the wards.

**Ms Harris**: Are family members recognised as part of the MDT, similar to a comparative model in adult social care, for example?   You have told us they are invited to attend: are they considered part of the team?

**The Chair**: You said they would attend the ward round, not the MDT.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They would attend the ward round.

**Ms Harris**: It is my fault.     I'd also understood -- were they invited to attend the MDT or not?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Not the MDT, the ward rounds.    They have to meet with the consultant or the team separately.

**Ms Harris**: Are they considered part of the MDT, even if not invited to attend the meetings?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: They are partners -- both the treating team and the family have the same aims to get the patient well and treat the patient, so they are very much part -- part of the team.   The responsibilities are different, I think. When a patient is on the ward, it is the responsibility of the ward and treating team.   It would be unfair to expect that -- you know, it's saying that they are part of the team and they are handing over that responsibility to the ward to look after the patient.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you, Chair.

Finally this: what is the relationship or expected relationship between the discharge coordinator and the care coordinator in respect of the discharge plan?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: The care coordinator is a member of the Community Mental Health Team who has been involved in the care of that patient in the community.

.. rst-class:: indented

Discharge -- and discharge coordinators are members of the inpatient team looking at the obstacles for discharge and assisting the team in ensuring that discharge takes place in a timely manner.

.. rst-class:: indented

I think the responsibilities of the care coordinator are wider, more clinical and most of the care coordinators are clinicians who have a better understanding of the mental health services.

**Ms Harris**: Chair, that's all the questions, unless you have any further questions of Dr Karale.

**The Chair**: I have no more questions.

Dr Karale, thank you very much indeed.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Dr Milind Karale**: Thank you.

**Ms Harris**: Chair, I think we will move now to hearing some summaries of evidence and that's just going to involve a change of personnel here and there.

Dr Karale can be released from his evidence.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed.

*(Pause)*

**Ms Harris**: Chair, thank you very much.   Another member of the Counsel to the Inquiry team, Anna Draper, will now present some summaries of evidence that the Inquiry has received so far, as I indicated this morning, from other organisations.   So I will hand over to Ms Draper now to present those summaries and I believe put up some relevant exhibits relating to them.

**The Chair**: Ms Draper, thank you. Summaries of further statements read by MS DRAPER

**Ms Draper**: This is a summary of the evidence provided to the Inquiry by the Department of Health and Social Care, otherwise referred to as the DHSC.    That evidence has already been disclosed to Core Participants and it should be noted that this summary will not cover the totality of the evidence provided.

The first heading is background and role.

The evidence submitted to the Inquiry on behalf of the DHSC thus far is in the form of a written statement signed by William Vineall, Director of NHS Quality Safety and Investigations and dated 24 March 2025.    For those following the documentation, that statement begins at page 370 in the core bundle.   I should also say that the relevant exhibits, I won't name individually in the summary, but they were disclosed to Core Participants as part of the April hearings exhibit bundle and will be published on the website, as I understand, in due course.

With his statement then, Mr Vineall disclosed a number of exhibits.    The DHSC, known as the Department of Health until 2018 is responsible for key functions in respect of the Health Service.    Those functions include: securing resources for the National Health Service, the NHS; overseeing and, where necessary, seeking to amend the legislative framework for the NHS; representing the views and interests of the NHS within Government; developing and supporting strategy and policy; and being accountable to Parliament for the NHS.

The DHSC's role is to support and advise the Government's health and social care ministers, and it oversees three main functions to that end: the NHS, public health and adult social care.   It is responsible for overall health policy, whilst NHS England (NHSE), has day-to-day responsibility for the NHS and for arranging and securing the provision of services, as of 1 July 2022, through Integrated Care Boards, otherwise known as ICBs.   Neither the Secretary of State nor the DHSC are responsible for directly commissioning NHS services.

The DHSC supports the Secretary of State in the discharge of their duties.   The Secretary of State has powers of intervention to deal with cases of persistent failure until those were repealed in 2007.   The National Health Service Act 2006 placed a duty on the Secretary to promote a comprehensive Health Service designed to secure improvements in the physical and mental health of people in England and in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of physical and mental illness.

The Health and Social Care Act 2012 made significant amendments to the 2006 Act and gave effect to a wide range of structural changes to the NHS.   One example is that Primary Care Trusts (PCTs) and Strategic Health Authorities were abolished and commissioning responsibilities were passed to a newly created NHS Commissioning Board (which would later become known as NHSE).   Separately to that, there were Clinical Commissioning Groups, also known as CCGs.

The Act made clear that the Secretary of State's responsibility lay primarily in ensuring that the functions of commissioning services and the provision of services were being carried out effectively.   The changes established a more rules-based system with NHS bodies' day-to-day operations being more clearly separated from the strategic role of ministers.

With the 2012 Act, the Secretary of State was required to publish and lay before Parliament a mandate to set strategic direction, and the content was subject to Government agreement and any objectives were reflected in NHSE operational guidance.   Those, for the relevant years, are exhibited in DHSC's statement.

The DHSC prioritises building strong and effective working relationships with each of its arm's length bodies, as they are referred to (ALBs), or public bodies via sponsorship teams.   These teams work collaboratively to ensure accountable, efficient and effective healthcare services.

NHS Improvement (NHSI) was a key ALB (arm's length body) that operated during the relevant period.      It was established on 1 April 2016 and merged with NHSE following the passage of the Health and Care Act 2022, although it was working together with NHSE from 1 April 2019, as a single organisation.   DHSC's role in respect of NHSI was to scrutinise its strategic, performance and delivery.

The DHSC has provided to the Inquiry an internal guide that was prepared for departmental staff, which sets out the roles and responsibilities of NHSI and how the Department held it to account during the time it was in operation.   The framework agreement between the Department and NHSI that was published in 2018 has also been supplied in the exhibits.

NHSI brought together Monitor, the NHS Trust Development Agency, Patient Safety, the National Reporting and Learning System, the Advancing Change Team and Intensive Support Teams.     Prior to this, on 9 March 2016, Monitor and the NHS Trust Development Authority published a "Learning from Mistakes League" to encourage openness and transparency in the NHS.

If I could ask that that's put up on screen, please.

This league table scored providers based on factors including near misses and incidents and the fairness and effectiveness of procedures for reporting errors.

Thank you, that can be taken down.

Essex NHS Trusts featured in that table.     The South Essex Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust was ranked 20 out of 230 trusts; the Mid Essex Hospital Services NHS Trust was 189th; and the North Essex Partnership University NHS Trust was 218th.     Supporting data from the 2015 NHS Staff Survey and National Reporting and Learning System was published alongside the table.

As of 2025 then, the DHSC is expected to publish a framework document outlining its relationship with each ALB, the governance and accountability arrangements, a remit or Chair's letter outlining key areas for the ALBs to focus on each year, this being mandated from either the Secretary of State or the NHSE, and to hold regular meetings with its ALBs.

The Department works closely with a range of other organisations including Government Departments on mental health services and inpatient safety matters, and these organisations include, but are not limited to Bipolar UK, the British Psychological Society, INQUEST, Mind, the National Institute for Mental Health, the ONS, the Office of National Statistics and the Zero Suicide Alliance.

Involvement with mental health services then.

The DHSC had an active policy agenda in relation to mental health during the relevant period which included the establishment and rollout of interventions such as Talking Therapies, Early Intervention in Psychosis services, shifting care from hospital to the community, reforms to the Mental Health Act, improving crisis care access, mental health support in schools and suicide prevention.

The Mental Health Act 1983 sets the legal framework to authorise detention and compulsory treatment of people with a mental health disorder.    It is supported by a code of practice.    Revisions have recently been proposed and are currently under consideration before Parliament.

The Department notes, for context, the NHS White Paper published in 1988 and the "National Service Framework for Mental Health" published in 1999.     Mention is also made of another publication, "A First Class Service".     That explained how NHS standards would be set by NICE, and National Service Frameworks (NSFs), delivered by clinical governance and monitored by the Commission for Health Improvement, amongst other things. NSFs were intended to improve the quality and consistency of healthcare by setting national standards for specific areas of health and social care, identifying key interventions and establishing strategies to tackle variations in access and service delivery across the country.

The first NSF published in 1999 set out seven standards the NHS were expected to meet for mental health, including access to services and suicide prevention.    The aims and standards were reflected in wider policies issued by the DHSC, for example the Health Services Circular, one of the included exhibits.

"The NHS Plan: A plan for investment, a plan for reform", in 2000 set out overall priorities and commitments for the NHS and it was intended to be a long-term vision for the NHS and to set national priorities, of which mental health was one.

The first "National Suicide Prevention Strategy for England" was published in 2002.    This supported the White Paper "Saving Lives: our Healthier Nation", published by the Department in 1999, which was a Government plan focused on the main killers, which included mental illness.     The target was to reduce the death rate from suicides by at least 20 per cent by 2010.

The National Institute of Mental Health in England oversaw the implementation of that strategy.

In 2011 the "No Health without Mental Health: A Cross-Government Mental Health Outcomes Strategy For People of All Ages" was published.    The strategy asserted that the quality of mental healthcare had improved in recent years but that more emphasis had to be placed on structures and processes, rather than outcomes.   The DHSC worked with several partner organisations to agree six shared objectives and six shared outcome indicators.    The outcomes related to prevention, treatment and recovery, physical health, positive experience of care and reducing avoidable harm.

A new 10-year national "Suicide Prevention Strategy for England" was then published in 2012 and it addressed new challenges and concerns and identified inpatients as a priority group for action.   In 2014, the DHSC then published "Closing the Gap: Priorities for essential change in mental health".   This set out shorter term priorities to achieve the longer-term vision.   Its goals included increased access to services and improving the lives of those with mental ill health.   "Achieving better access to mental health services by 2020" was also published in 2014, that was by both the DHSC and NHSE. It detailed three phases to change mental health services, including increasing capacity and introducing waiting time standards to improve access, and aimed to achieve parity between physical and mental health services.

The DHSC and NHSE jointly published "Future in Mind" the following year, in 2015, which emphasised the NHS, public health, local authorities and other organisations working together to build resilience, promoting good mental health and prevention, early intervention and other things.   The aim was for commissioners to make better decisions about what inpatient capacity was needed.

In 2016, NHSE commissioned the paper "Implementing the Five Year Forward View for Mental Health".    This set out an implementation programme to deliver recommendations from a Mental Health Taskforce and a number of key commitments.

Then in 2018, the Mental Health Units (Use of Force) Act was introduced with the aim of reducing unnecessary and inappropriate use of restraint in mental health hospitals.

In 2019, "The NHS Long Term Plan" set out 10-year priorities for the NHS.    The plan included priorities for inpatient mental health settings, including eliminating inappropriate out-of-area placements, reducing the average length of stay, and reducing suicide for mental health inpatients.   Also in 2019, was the publication of the "NHS Mental Health Implementation Plan", which detailed plans for delivering the remaining commitments under the Five Year Forward View and how these would be built on to deliver those targets under the NHS Long Term Plan.

The "Covid-19 mental health and wellbeing recovery action plan" in 2021 outlined the Government's plans to mitigate and respond to the mental health impact of the pandemic and it aimed to provide additional funding to keep the Long Term Plan and Mental Health Act reforms on track.

In 2023, NHSE launched the "Mental Health, Learning Disability and Autism Inpatient Quality Transformation Programme" to support cultural change across inpatient services.   The DHSC then published another paper titled "Major Conditions Strategy: case for change and our strategic framework", identifying six key groups of conditions contributing to ill health, one of which was mental ill health.   An additional paper then in 2023 was, "The Suicide Prevention Strategy for England" which replaced the 2012 strategy and set out priority areas for action, including the need for effective crisis support to reduce suicide specifically.

Finally in 2024, the Mental Health Bill was introduced.   After an independent review into the Mental Health Act, the Government published a White Paper, Reforming the Mental Health Act, which accepted most of the review's recommendations.   The Bill is now undergoing Parliamentary scrutiny.

There are several relevant policies cited by the DHSC.    The first, on reducing inappropriate out-of-area placements, was introduced as early as 1999 and remained a core aim in the 2019 NHS Long Term Plan.   The Plan set out aims to eliminate out-of-area placements by 2023/24, although this was not achieved, the DHSC states, due to factors such as the pandemic and difficulties in patient flow through the system.     The aim was accompanied by a recognition that spending more time in hospital did not necessarily lead to better outcomes for patients.

There was a policy on ensuring timely follow up after someone is discharged from inpatient facilities. The standard expectation was that patients would receive follow-up support within seven days.    The aim was then for inpatients to receive a follow-up within 72 hours of discharge.   This was abandoned when NHSE stopped publishing data on this metric in April 2021.

A policy on assessing the physical environment to remove means of suicide was introduced in 1999.     Removal of ligature points was also identified in the 2002 suicide prevention strategy and in multiple policy documents published since.    There was a 35 per cent fall in the number of inpatient suicides between 2010 and 2020, and improvements on this number remains a key aim for the Department.

As to policies around risk management for suicide and self-harm, the focus during the first part of the relevant period was on staff training for risk management and suicide being updated every three years. Later Policy documents from the DHSC and NHSE encouraged compliance with NICE guidelines on risk formulation and management.   The 2023 National Prevention Strategy notes that trusts and providers should go further to identify and implement actions to prevent suicides in inpatient settings.

The Department issued a policy around ensuring that patients, carers and families are included in decision-making, planning and information sharing.     To that end, the 12 points to a safer service guidance set out in the Five-Year Report of the National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide by People with Mental Illness emphasised the importance of sharing information with families during reviews of suicide, as well as risk management training for staff and other factors.   In 2014, the Government announced that Departments were expected to use the family test as part of quality assessment of services and that carers should be closely involved in decisions about service provision.   The co-production of services with people with lived experience, their families and carers, was emphasised further in the Five Year Forward View and the associated implementation plan.

The principle of providing therapeutic care in the least restrictive environment is consistent throughout many policies in the relevant period, from the NHS plan in 2000 to Government announcements in 2020 detailing investment in greater privacy in mental health facilities.

There have been policies on improving access to services and reducing waiting times and on crisis care. As to improving access, there was a commitment to increasing the number of beds in the implementation plan for the Five Year Forward View, for example.    On crisis care, there was a focus on liaison teams in A&E supporting people with mental illness to reduce inappropriate hospital care and out-of-area placements. The Long Term Plan set out an intention for mental health liaison services to be available in all acute hospital A&E departments and inpatient wards in 2023/24.

Finally, there have been policies on addressing inequality, stigma and encouraging a culture of care. A national inequalities target was first introduced in 2000, to reinforce local targets for reducing inequality.   In 2018, the Independent Review of the Mental Health Act highlighted racial disparities in the rates of detention.   Within this policy, it is noted that the Government consulted on the White Paper proposals issued a response to the Independent Review. A draft Bill was also issued in 2022 and the Joint Pre-Legislative Scrutiny Committee produced a report and recommendations in March 2024.

Monitoring of compliance concerns and failings at a national level.

The Secretary of State has responsibility to Parliament for the provision of the Health Service and the DHSC is responsible for the health and care legislative framework.   Most operational management in the NHS, including mental health services, takes place at arm's length from the Department.   The DHSC holds ALBs accountable through its sponsorship arrangements and each ALB has a Senior Departmental Sponsor.    The Department's levers include the power for the Secretary of State to appoint and remove Chairs; accountability from the accounting officer of each ALB; framework agreements between the DHSC and the ALB; annual business plans, and performance reporting against those plans; and a programme of reviews.

The Secretary of State retains formal powers to intervene in the event of significant failure by a non-departmental public body.   As a first step the Secretary can issue a direction to the ALB and, if the organisation fails to comply, the Department may discharge the functions to which the direction relates or make arrangements for another organisation to do so. In all cases, reasons for an intervention must be published.

To safeguard the independence of regulators, ministers are prevented from intervening in specific cases dealt with by Monitor or the CQC.   Ministerial powers are limited to situations of significant failure.

The CQC took over responsibility for monitoring and inspecting the quality of services in 2009.    The Health and Social Care Act 2008 requires the CQC to keep the Secretary of State informed about the provision of NHS healthcare services and they may intervene and issue directions.   The Secretary can also carry out the functions of the CQC or, again, arrange for a third party to do so if the CQC fails to comply.    That power, however, has not been exercised since the creation of the CQC.

At Annex E to the witness statement provided, there is a summary of investigations, independent reviews and audits commissioned by the DHSC over the relevant period.

Evidence from reviews and reports commissioned by the Department points to factors supportive of patient safety.    There were many independent reviews, reports and inquiries, not all directly commissioned by the DHSC, which led to important learning and Government action in relation to inpatient safety.   One example is the "An organisation with a memory" report, commissioned to learn about the scale and nature of serious failings in the NHS and to make requisite recommendations.    The report, although not specific to mental health, found that a blame culture and the lack of a national system for sharing lessons learnt were key barriers to identifying and then reducing the number of patient safety incidents.   It also highlighted the need for the Government to act on recommendations quicker.

The Department then responded with "Building a safer NHS".   This set out plans to establish the National Patient Safety Agency and a mandatory reporting scheme extending to mental health inpatient services.    The report found there was a lack of clarity as to when an external investigation was required after an incident and, in 2005, the DHSC published guidance titled "Independent investigation of adverse events in mental health services".

The Department learnt from serious incidents and failings in care, such as the death of Olaseni Lewis, who was otherwise known as Seni, who lost his life following the disproportionate and inappropriate use of force in a mental health unit.    A Private Member's Bill titled Seni's Law was introduced to Parliament in 2017 and aimed to reduce the use restraint in hospitals.     It received Royal Assent in 2018 as the Mental Health Units (Use of Force) Act that I have already referred to. Accompanying statutory guidance was published after public consultation.

After a series of high-profile patient safety incidents and abuse of patients, the DHSC commissioned a rapid review into mental health inpatient safety in 2023.     The review recommended that the DHSC and the NHS needed to ensure that the most important and impactful metrics were being measured regarding mental health patient safety and therapeutic care.

In March 2024, the Department published the Government's response to the rapid review and set up a steering group and a mortality working group to act on the recommendations.

The Government then commissioned the Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch, otherwise referred to as HSSIB, to undertake a series of national investigations into mental health inpatient services to cover four priority areas: how out-of-area placements are handled; supporting transition to adult inpatient settings for children and young people; creating conditions for delivery of safe and therapeutic care; and learning from deaths.    In January 2025, the HSSIB concluded their investigations and the findings have been published in a series of reports available on their website and also included in the exhibits.     As part of this, the decision was taken to undertake further work, the results of which are due to be published this month, May.    The DHSC will be formally responding to all of the recommendations in due course.

Action has been taken at a national level and progress made.   One example being the reduction in the use of police cells as a place of safety for people in mental health crisis, including as a result of collaboration between the DHSC, police, health and mental health charities, as part of "The Mental Health Crisis Care Concordat".     Another example is the action recommended by the Independent Review of the Mental Health Act, to replace dormitory accommodation on inpatient wards; and 43 projects have been completed to this end.

Finally, the DHSC notes that it remains the case that too many people experience poor quality care and lose their lives in inpatient mental health settings. HSSIB's report "Mental health inpatient settings: creating conditions for learning from deaths in mental health inpatient services and when patients die within 30 days of discharge" includes a diagram.

If I could ask please that that's put up at page 5951.

This diagram details the flow of accountability from Parliament all the way down to patients and the public at the bottom.    The HSSIB report underlines that the DHSC and others could do more to learn from deaths and/or the issues identified in their reviews.

Thank you, that can come down.

Chair, that is the summary of the evidence from DHSC.

I wonder if that might be an appropriate time to take a short break.

**Ms Harris**: I think a short 10-minute break.

**The Chair**: Perfect.   Thank you very much indeed. 10 minutes.

*(3.38 pm)*

*(A short break)*

*(3.55 pm)*

**The Chair**: Ms Draper.

**Ms Draper**: The next summary is of the evidence provided to the Inquiry by NHS England.    Again this summary will not cover the totality of the information provided. Firstly, as to its role, the evidence submitted on behalf of NHSE on its role was provided in a statement by Duncan Burton, Chief Nursing Officer, dated 24 March 2025.    That statement is at page 458 of the core bundle.

NHSE is a system of commissioners, regulators and providers, each with distinct roles.    It is an executive non-departmental public body of the DHSC.    Since its establishment in 2013, it has been the commissioner of certain specialised mental health services.     The statutory regulator of local commissioners and Trusts; it has an overall leadership role; and also a patient safety role.

It was formerly the NHS Commissioning Board for England.   During the relevant period there was a significant legislative reform which led to NHS regulatory bodies coming together.     The first change was NHS Improvement in 2016, which combined Monitor and the NHS Trust Development Authority, they were regulators of the Foundation Trusts and Trusts respectively.    NHSI and NHSE came together in 2019, formally merging in 2022. NHSE also merged with NHS Digital in February 2023, and with Health Education England in April 2023.

Commissioning is defined as the role of planning and securing the provision of healthcare services.    It involves an ongoing process of assessment, planning, agreement and monitoring to ensure services are provided and delivered to the required standard.    Commissioning responsibility falls to NHSE for specialised services and to ICBs, the Integrated Care Boards, for non-specialised services.

Patients receive their care from providers who have an arrangement to deliver services with one or more commissioners.   The providers are accountable to commissioners through their contracts and it is their responsibility to ensure services are carried out in accordance with specifications in line with clinical guidance and nationally determined healthcare standards. The providers employ their own staff and procure their own supplies.    NHSE exercises an appointment role in relation to certain senior roles within the Trusts but, aside from that, none of the staff are employed or managed by NHSE.

NHSE's core legal function and purpose is to promote a comprehensive health service to secure improvement in physical and mental health, and the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of physical and mental illness. It also has a role in respect of oversight of local commissioners and providers and the NHS works with the DHSC to contribute to the development of policy and to support the Government in understanding the implications of their policies.   To that end, NHSE engages with other people and organisations as necessary, including service users.

The Department is governed by its own board which provides leadership and accountability.    It has regional teams responsible for the performance of all NHS organisations, overseeing interactions with Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs), and for commissioning functions in the region.     Each regional team is led by the Regional Director, who is part of the NHSE Executive.   In relation to mental health services then, each region provides the functions of strategic quality and patient safety oversight and policy implementation. The Regional Medical Director and Chief Nurse are responsible for leading regional quality teams and ensuring robust clinical governance and quality assurance.   They chair the Regional Quality Committee which oversees quality improvement and patient safety including the reviewing of serious incidents.

Regional teams also participate in ICB Executive Quality Groups.   For ICB-level failures they assess the implications and support the providers.    In addition, if a provider receives a CQC Warning Notice, the regional team supports them in implementing the relevant guidance.    For any providers in a Recovery Support Programme, which was formerly the Special Measures Programme, they support the central NHSE team in managing recovering providers.

In its role as commissioner, the NHSE enters into contracts with independent and NHS providers and, from 2013, it had statutory responsibility for commissioning primary care services, prescribed specialised services, including for mental health, certain military and veteran health services, services supporting children and adults throughout the criminal justice system and a limited number of public health services.     They directly commissioned mental health services that included adult secure, children and young people, specialist autism spectrum disorder, adult eating disorder and OCD and body dysmorphic disorder services.

Specialised services commissioned by NHSE are grouped into six National Programmes of Care, one of which is mental health.     The programmes work primarily through a network of Clinical Reference Groups, which develop national service specifications and guidance. One of the aims of the Groups is to integrate lived inpatient experience to enhance mental health services.

Since 2020, NHS-led provider collaboratives have been in force.   These are groups of providers of specialised mental health, learning disability and autism services who work together to improve care pathways for their local population.    The collaboratives deliver specialised services, again in children and young people's mental health, adult low and medium secure, and adult eating disorder services.

Since April 2024, the ICBs in the East of England Midlands and Northwest have assumed full delegated commissioning responsibility for suitable services.     The CCGs, established in 2013, were responsible for planning and commissioning healthcare services within their local area, and were clinically led by statutory NHS bodies. As co-commissioners, CCGs worked with the NHSE regional teams before they were replaced by ICBs in 2022.

Since 2003, a Trust can be an NHS Trust or an NHS Foundation Trust, the key difference is that Foundation Trusts have more autonomy.   Each Trust is responsible for ensuring compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements for the delivery of safe, effective, efficient and high quality services.   It is also the responsibility of the provider to manage day-to-day care and the management of patients.   This includes decision-making around a patient's suitability for treatment and whether a patient should be admitted. Clinical treatment decisions are made in accordance with operational policy, provider procedure, clinical guidance and subject to regulatory requirements.

NHS Trusts and Foundation Trusts are subject to legal duties around health and safety, person safety, complaints, data protection, safeguarding, in their own right.   Compliance with those duties informs NHSE and CQC oversight.   Legal enforcement can occur outside of this sphere, for example through health and safety prosecutions and also judicial review.

Before the introduction of Monitor with the Health and Social Care Act 2012, the Foundation Trusts were regulated by the independent regulator of Foundation Trusts, established in 2004.    Monitor had a range of intervention and enforcement actions, as well as a role in supporting failing Foundation Trusts.   It became aware of patient safety issues in a variety of ways and conducted its own assessments to decide whether a formal investigation was necessary and enforcement action appropriate.   As of 1 April 2013, the Trusts were monitored and regulated by the NHS Trust Development Authority.

Mental health services are delivered by a range of professionals in multidisciplinary teams, the majority of which are also regulated by the NMC, the Nursing and Midwifery Council, GMC or the HCPC.

In 2016, NHS Improvement was created and became responsible for regulating NHS hospitals before being subsumed into NHSE in 2019.    At that point, the NHSE's role didn't change but, rather, the two organisations came together.   It continued to be responsible for commissioning and NHSI responsible, through Monitor and the Trust Development Authority, for the regulation of providers.   In 2022, the NHSE and Improvement formally merged, at which point NHSE then took on the regulatory functions of improvement.

As to oversight, providers are subject to, primarily, registration and regulation by the CQC, contractual controls via the commissioning contract, and for Foundation Trusts and certain independent providers, there is also the NHS provider licence.

Sense 1 April 2023, NHS Trusts have been required to hold a Provider Licence.    The Foundation Trusts were expected to comply with the NHS Foundation Trust Code of Governance, which also echoed the requirements of the Provider Licence.

The "fit and proper" person test applies to both organisations and individuals.   In 2012 and 2014, statutory requirements imposed fit and proper persons requirements in relation to appointments to Foundation Trust boards.   Enforcing compliance with the Fit and Proper Person Regulation was the responsibility of the CQC, although it was incorporated into the Provider Licence framework.

Before 2016, there were separate oversight frameworks which applied to the Foundation Trusts and Trusts.   From September that year, the single oversight framework was introduced with the aim of supporting more trusts to achieve good or outstanding ratings.    When NHSE and Improvement merged, a single NHS Oversight Framework, which applied to commissioners and providers, was implemented.

There are also primary care networks, in which GP practices work together with the community, mental health, social care, pharmacy, hospital and voluntary services.   The networks ensure that mental health services are closely linked to community healthcare and encourage a more comprehensive approach to mental health care.

Involvement with providers.

NHSE operates as an arm's-length body, as we have already heard, an ALB, that has a shared responsibility with similar organisations to oversee patient safety. Patient safety is part of a wider concept of quality and success in healthcare and it means the avoidance of unintended harm and the reduction of risk of such harm to an acceptable level.     It does not concern deliberate or intended harm as those are events concerning the police and other safeguarding bodies.

NHS bodies are expected to deliver and/or oversee services including those that improve patient safety and that expectation is established through legal duties, reporting requirements, observance of clinical standards and their commissioner requirements.    Trusts make their own policies for risk management and health and safety and they are informed by guidance from organisations such as the CQC.    For example, the CQC has published guidance on reducing harm from ligatures on mental health wards.    That is included as one of the exhibits.

NHSE was established to deliver key statutory patient safety duties across the NHS, including collecting information about what goes wrong and using that to provide advice and guidance.    These included collecting information about what goes wrong in the Health Service and, between 2012 and 2018, there were a number of patient safety initiatives directed by the Government.     The NHS Patient Safety Strategy 2019, which was updated then in 2021 and 2023, was one of these and aimed at improving the way the NHS learns about patient safety, building capability to address safety challenges and focus on key improvement priorities.

There are two systems which set out the expectations for the way in which the NHS should identify and manage certain patient safety incidents and serious incidents. The first is the "National Framework for Reporting and Learning from Serious Incidents Requiring Investigation" and that was in place between 2010 and 2013.

Secondly, the "Serious Incident Framework", published first in 2013 and refreshed in 2015.   A new policy was then announced when NHSE published the Patient Safety Incident Response Framework (PSIRF) in 2022, which we have already heard about in evidence.

Could I ask that we have page 6415 up, please.     This is included in the exhibits, titled "PSIRF".

The PSIRF replaced the Serious Incident Framework and is one of the main systems for developing and maintaining effective processes for responding to patient safety incidents and facilitating learning. There is an overview of the framework and associated documentation shown here.

Patient safety incidents are defined in the framework as "any unexpected or unintended events occurring in healthcare that could have or did, lead to harm to one or more patients".

Thank you Amanda.

There were three patient safety incident reporting tools used during the relevant period: the first, the National Reporting and Learning System (NRLS), created in 2003; the Strategic Executive Information System; and the Learn from Patient Safety Events service, LFPSE. The Strategic Executive Information System was primarily used as a mechanism for trusts to notify regional and national health bodies about incidents meeting the threshold for serious incident, which included "Never Events", a specific type of Serious Incident listed under NHSE guidance.   The NRLS and LFPSE systems are secondary use systems, collating information already on Trusts' local risk management systems, like Datix and Ulysses.   Initially, incident reporting was voluntary. However, providers now have a statutory responsibility to notify the CQC about certain patient safety incidents, such as unexpected deaths.

The current framework was implemented following concerns about the earlier serious incident framework by inquiries, investigations and reviews into the NHS.     In response to the reports Improvement launched an engagement programme in March 2018, to gather feedback to support a new approach.   Compliance with the framework is a contractual requirement under the NHS Standard Contract.   At the same time, the National Patient Safety Team launched a consultation on developing the first Patient Safety Strategy.

Unlike the Serious Incident Framework, the PSIRF does not distinguish between patient safety incidents and serious incidents.   Instead, it's intended to promote a proportionate approach to reporting patient safety incidents.   NHSE published a template plan and related guidance, included in the exhibits.     The framework also emphasised the importance of engagement with families and those affected by an incident.

The NHSE and CQC were given duties to cooperate with each other under the Health and Social Care Act 2012 and in 2013 they signed a partnership agreement.    The agreement set out their respective roles and stipulated the common goal of the delivery of safe and good quality care.   The primary statutory responsibility of the CQC is detailed as regular sight visits and on the ground inspections of care delivery and the NHSE places considerable reliance on those assessments.

There is a Joint Strategic Oversight Group which provides a national forum for intelligence sharing, and Quality Surveillance Groups which facilitated NHSE engagement with the CQC and other regulators.    The model for the Groups was first published in 2013.     In January 2022, the National Quality Board replaced the Quality Surveillance Groups and risk summits with a new operating model.

In relation to emerging concerns and the involvement of professional regulators, it should be noted that the CQC and others concerned with quality and safety and public protection have developed an Emerging Concerns Protocol.   The protocol was first published in 2018, having arisen as an action following a forum convened by a meeting of system regulators and professional regulators in October 2016.   Professional regulators, such as the GMC, the General Medical Council, the local Government and the Social Care Ombudsman, Health Education England, and Parliamentary Health Standards Ombudsman are signatories to the protocol.

HSIB was established under the NHS Trust Development Authority regulations in 2016.    This was an independent division responsible for investigating patient safety incidents and the incidents investigated were those that the chief investigator considered showed risks affecting patient safety, following which it made recommendations to improve safety.   The organisation's role was to encourage a culture of learning and improvement within the NHS.   In 2022, the Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch became the Health Services Safety Investigation Branch, and that was established on an independent statutory footing with more independence than previously.

As to investigations, most investigations are undertaken by providers.    NHSE has the power to undertake investigations directly, albeit this power has never been used; investigations are usually commissioned at regional level.   NHSE becomes aware of incidents in several ways, although again they wouldn't be aware of every incident subject to investigation.    In some circumstances, the incidents would be escalated to ICBs and then to the NHSE.    This would normally be appropriate in situations when, for instance, an independent investigation is deemed necessary to ensure public confidence in investigation integrity or where the incident represents significant learning potential for the wider system.   As an example, there was an NHSE-commissioned independent investigation into homicides committed by patients treated for mental illness in 2013.

A medical examiner system was formally implemented in 2023.   The system had several purposes including providing a better service for the bereaved.      In addition, NHSE and the coronial service worked together in relation to Prevention of Future Deaths reports and NHSE would often receive those reports in its role as a commissioner.

There is a statutory product for complaints and any concerns not in the form of complaints would be dealt with informally, and many trusts had PALS, Patient Advice and Liaison Services, to assist.    Concerns could also be referred to the Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman.   As a commissioner of mental health services, the NHSE required providers to agree arrangements for the delivery of services within the terms of the NHS Standard Contract.   The contract requires that a provider complies with its statutory obligations around complaints.   The NHSE also has a duty to handle, record, and monitor complaints in its role as a commissioner, regulator and also under its oversight obligations.

Safeguarding is an integral part of providing high quality healthcare and NHSE adopts a broad approach to safeguarding.   It is responsible for ensuring that the health commissioning system works effectively in safeguarding and promoting the welfare of vulnerable people, and for leading improvement of safeguarding practice.    The Chief Nursing Officer has lead responsibility for ensuring the effective discharge of those statutory safeguarding responsibilities.     NHSE also facilitates the sharing of best practice and safeguarding improvements to ensure the health system is working effectively.

In respect of whistleblowing, the NHSE publishes guidance to providers which is intended to set a minimum standard with which providers should comply.      National guidance on whistleblowing was first issued in 2016.      It was issued since the NHSE has published a "Freedom to Speak Up" policy to normalise speaking up for the benefit of patients and workers.   This policy came with a guide for leaders in the NHS and organisations delivering services.   All Trusts were expected to adopt the policy.

In relation to mental health policy, specifically, the "Five Year Forward View" was published in 2014 which set out an intention to transform the NHS by 2020.    The document was a joint publication by NHSE, the CQC, Health Education England, Monitor, Public Health England, and the NHS Trust Development Authority. A further document implementing the Five Year Forward View for Mental Health was published in 2016, which set out plans for developing mental health services following the recommendations of an independent NHSE-commissioned report.

The NHS Long Term Plan was published in 2019 which detailed a plan to transform mental health services further.   There was subsequently a NHS Mental Health Implementation Plan for 2019/20 through to 2023/24, published.    The plan detailed aims including eliminating out-of-area placements and reducing the length of inpatient stays.

In 2015, NHSE introduced waiting time standards for three mental health service areas, Talking Therapies, Early Intervention in Psychosis and eating disorder services.   Since 2015, the NHS has met the standard for talking therapy and early intervention in psychosis. The NHSE later published a consultation on a range of further proposed waiting times.   Also in 2015, NHSE published guidance to the NHS and local authority commissioners setting out a plan for developing community and inpatient facilities close to home.

NHSE and NHS Improvement commissioned the Mental Health Safety Improvement Plan, a national patient safety programme, which was developed after a pilot programme saw a significant reduction in the use of restrictive practice.    Its aim was to improve safety and experience in mental health, learning disability and autism inpatient services.    The programme ran from 2021 to 2023 and worked with 54 NHS Trusts, as well as the CQC and regional NHS Improvement teams.   The NHSE then launched a Mental Health, Learning Disability and Autism Inpatient Quality Transformation Programme to develop a new model of care across NHS-funded mental health and inpatient services.

The Culture of Care Standards for Mental Health Inpatient Services were then published in April 2024. These were co-produced with input from people with lived experience of inpatient services and their families.

The Culture of Care Standards included core commitments and standards for the culture of mental health inpatient care.

In relation to funding then, NHS England introduced the Mental Health Investment Standard in 2017 requiring commissioners to increase their spend on mental health. As to staffing, NHSE recognised that staff shortages remain a major constraint to improving and expanding mental health services.      They published in 2017 and in 2019 estimates of how many additional staff would be required to deliver improved mental health services.     In 2023, they published the NHS Long Term Workforce Plan, which anticipated that demand for mental health services would grow faster than other NHS services.

It stated that between 2017 and 2022/23, total spending on mental health services went up by an average of 2.7 per cent a year in real terms.     In the same period, spending on Children and Young People's mental health increased by an average of 7 per cent a year. Mental health spend as a proportion of total recurrent NHS spend increased from 8.9 per cent in 2022/23 to 9 per cent in 23/24.

On the topic of suicide specifically, the Five Year Forward View made a commitment to reducing suicides nationally.   This was supported by the Government's "National Suicide Prevention Strategy".   In September 2023 the Government published a policy paper on suicide prevention in England.   NHSE also commissioned the National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide.

The Mental Health Services Data Set is dealt with in more detail in a moment in this statement.   The data essentially aims to deliver nationally consistent information regarding individuals in contact with mental health services.   The data is released regularly via the NHS Digital website.   In 2016, the NHSE introduced the Mental Health Dashboard which aimed to bring together data across mental health services.

The second part of this summary relates to out-of-area placements, data systems and inpatient mental health data.

The evidence submitted on this was provided in a statement by Clare Panniker, NHSE Regional Director for East of England, dated 24 March 2025, page 858 in the core bundle.

On involvement with mental health services, NHSE has statutory responsibility for commissioning certain mental health services, as we have already said.    Not every ICB has every service available in its area, which is why patients may be placed away from home to access appropriate care and treatment.   The term "Natural Clinical Flow" is used to describe appropriate out-of-area placements and defines the range of specialist services available.    It must be clinically appropriate for a patient to be placed out-of-area, proportionate to any risk and local responsibility and involvement must be maintained.   A patient may be placed out-of-area for reasons including limited provision nationally, patient and/or family choice and safeguarding considerations.

NHSE produced a Standard Operating Procedure, an SOP, on Commissioning Specialised Services in 2020. The SOP reiterated that an out-of-area placement must be clinically appropriate and that all specialised services must have defined natural clinical flows.   It also set out the process for out-of-area placements.

Mental health data started being reported nationally in 2009.   The first set of national mental health data collected was the Mental Health Minimum Data Set from 2006 to 2014.   Between 1 September 2014 and 31 September 2015, data was stored on the Mental Health and Learning Disabilities Set.   On 1 January 2016 the MHSDS, which was the set mentioned earlier, was introduced.

The MHSDS records all activity relating to patients who receive care for a suspected or diagnosed mental health need and the statement provided to the Inquiry notes that recordkeeping has improved with better IT services and, in 2012, the Health and Social Care Act gave NHSE the power to require data from health and social care bodies.   Between 2016 and 2021, additional data was held on the Specialised Mental Health Patient Level Data Set, as specialist services were not identifiable in the MHSDS.   Those systems were integrated in 2021.

Finally, then, out-of-area placements.

There is an NHSE spreadsheet on out-of-area placements provided in the exhibits.   It sets out various details regarding the specialised mental health services accessed by patients who are registered with a GP in Essex, prior to their admission, and placed out-of-area, as well as those patients placed with independent providers in the relevant period.     The data is said to have limitations.   For example, it runs from 2016 onwards as no Specialised Mental Health Service datasets were identified prior to that.   Exhibited is also a list of all Specialised Mental Health Services commissioned by NHSE in the East of England as at June 2021.

The Inquiry asked NHSE what data it holds nationally for inpatient deaths, as defined in its Terms of Reference.   NHSE explained that the MHSDS records the date of an individual's death but does not detail the circumstances.   It also notes that the dataset is designed to understand current activity flow in secondary mental health services and is not designed to track mortalities within services.    Further, the dataset is limited in that it will only capture deaths where the person died at the time of being known to the service.

Separately, NHSE is informed of, and collects information relating to, patient safety incidents including where a patient has died.   The Learn From Patient Safety Events is said to collect around 2.4 million patient safety incident records each year and can indicate specific mitigating actions to reduce risk.   They also located 300 hard copy Serious Untoward Incident reports stored between 2007 and 2010.

NHSE was unable to provide certain specific data in relation to inpatient deaths for Essex.   In summary:

It does not hold specific data regarding patient deaths prior to 2009;

For data between 2009 and 2015, data does not provide bed or service type, there is also limited data from Independent Providers and this does not include CAMHS or, prior to 2014, learning disability and autism patients;

NHSE cannot provide details of those who died whilst awaiting an assessment under the Mental Health Act, those who died whilst waiting for a bed within three months of a clinical assessment of need, those who died within three months of a decision not to admit or those who died within three months of discharge from an inpatient unit.

After 2009, the organisation is able to provide data on those who died on an inpatient unit, on leave or having absconded and those who died within three months of transfer from inpatient units.

That is the summary of NHSE's evidence, provided to the Inquiry thus far.

The last summary relates to evidence from mental health charities.

As part of its work, the Inquiry sought evidence and information from various mental health charities and the following is a summary of that evidence that's been provided to the Inquiry so far by Mind and Rethink Mental Illness.

Again, the summary will not cover the totality of the information provided.

Starting with Mind, the evidence submitted was provided in a statement signed by Alice Livermore, Head of Legal and dated 24 March 2025 at page 1370 in the bundle.   The statement provides information on behalf of national Mind, and national Mind undertakes its work under four headings: campaigns and policy; advocacy and engagement; research and observations; and collaboration with local organisations.

National Mind is a mental health charity operating in England and Wales.    The senior management team is made up of six individuals who are responsible for Mind's overall strategy and for ensuring that its activities are effectively carried out.   The board of trustees consists of 15 individuals.   The board is responsible for Mind's governance and strategic direction, which includes scrutiny of Mind's performance and support of the executive team of directors.

As well as national Mind, there are approximately 100 local Minds, which act as independent charities with their own CEOs, boards of trustees and strategies.    Some local Minds work in inpatient settings, in roles such as independent mental health advocates.   Local Mind branches may campaign for better local services or join national campaigns.

Involvement with inpatient care.

One of the pillars of mind's strategy to 2030 is titled "Changing minds", which details the charity's intentions to tackle injustice and inequity in the delivery of mental health services and to demand services that support people's rights, keeps them safe and offers them hope regardless of background.    Work on inpatient care sits within this pillar.

One of the ways in which Mind has contributed to the safety of inpatient care was with the start of its work relating to physical restraint in crisis care in 2010, followed by the launch of a national campaign in 2013. The report "Mental health crisis care: physical restraint in crisis" made several recommendations, one of which was for NHS England to introduce standardised data capture methods to ensure that every mental health trust is collecting the same data on the use of restraints.    Ms Livermore explains that the report, in connection with the BBC Panorama documentary on the Winterborne scandal led to new national guidance, and subsequent restriction on the use of restraint.

Prior to 2018, Mind worked to influence the Mental Health Units (Use of Force) Act 2018 liaising with Steve Reed MP to generate support for the Bill and strengthen its content.   Mind was involved in briefings to MPs and encouraged supporters to write their MPs asking them to attend to debate the bill.    Mind was also involved in the drafting of statutory guidance to accompany the Bill and the Bill was given Royal Assent in 2018.

Mind was involved with the independent review of the Mental Health Act from the beginning.    Director of External Relations, Sophie Corlett, was on the working group supporting the Chairs in completion of the Review. Mind also ran influencing and participation workshops seeking the views of those with mental health problems to establish what they wanted to campaign for.    Strong themes that arose out of the discussions were the presence of racial bias and discrimination and a lack of access and confidence or trust in services.

Mind has continued to engage with reform in a number of ways, including the running of a week-long Parliamentary exhibition on people's experiences of inpatient admissions.    Mind also submitted a response to the Government's White Paper on "Reforming the Mental Health Act".   The research highlighted the need for the rights to a statutory care plan and safe and therapeutic service environments, amongst other things.

Prior to 2018, Mind focused primarily on the rights and needs of adults.    In 2022, Mind conducted research into children and young people's experiences of inpatient services.    The report, published in 2023, noted serious failings including young people being placed in adult wards far from home and being unnecessarily medicated and restrained.     It found that 45 per cent of children and young people were sectioned five times or more and many were provided with inadequate care in the community, with some leaving hospital without a care plan.

In 2023, Mind launched its "Raise the Standard" campaign, a campaign specifically concerned with inpatient care.    The campaign sought several changes including the reshaping of mental health hospitals as places of hope, dignity and recovery; reforming of the Mental Health Act with changes to give everyone more choice, dignity and control in hospital; and a full statutory inquiry into failings in inpatient mental health services.

In the lead up to the campaign, the charity conducted a survey to better understand experiences of inpatient care.    In addition, a YouGov poll conducted on behalf of Mind showed that more than a third of respondents said they would not have confidence that a loved one would be safe if they needed inpatient care or that they would be treated with respect or compassion.   One respondent, citing her experience of being sectioned for bipolar disorder six times, recalled seeing people "manhandled by staff".

Visitors to Mind's website for information and support relating to being sectioned in mental health inpatient hospitals has significantly increased, reaching nearly 1 million views in the year 2022/23.

As to involvement with Essex-based Trusts, the statement details that national Mind does not partner with any local healthcare providers, in Essex or otherwise.   They have held online briefings with providers to give their views on policy matters, such as the NHS Long Term Plan, and have met with ICBs.     The organisation has not met, however, with any Essex-based ICBs.

Since this summary was prepared, Mind has provided further evidence to the Inquiry by way of a more detailed statement with exhibits.   This evidence is currently being reviewed.

Finally, the evidence from Rethink Mental Illness. This was provided by Mark Winstanley, Chief Executive, in a statement dated 26 March 2025.   The statement is at page 1377 in the core bundle.

Rethink Mental Illness is a leading charity provider of mental health services.   Its mission is to improve the lives of people severely affected by mental illness; to provide expert advice, information and training in mental health; and to advance awareness and understanding of the causes, consequences and management of mental illness.

The organisation is governed by a board of trustees responsible for the overall direction and control of the charity's activities.    There are four committees to assist with its work: Honorary Officers Committee; the Audit and assurance Committee; Finance and Investment Committee; and the Council of Rethink, which exists to improve the work and governance of the charity.

There are also several Governance Link Groups including a Lived Experience Advisory Board and Carer's Advisory Board.   These involve a wider range of people interested in contributing to the organisation's work. The statement also details that Rethink holds regional forums designed to enable community feedback and local intelligence.

One of the ways that Rethink Mental Illness has been involved in inpatient care is through representation on boards and groups, for example Mr Winstanley currently sits on the Mental Health, Learning Disabilities and Autism Quality Transformation Oversight Group and previously co-chaired the Steering Group of the Rapid Review into data on Mental Health Inpatient Settings. Ian Callaghan, Lived Experience Programme Manager, currently sits on the Culture of Care Lived Experience Group and previously worked with the Care Quality Commission, the CQC.   Influencing activity is key to Rethink Mental Illness' work for inpatient care and, under that umbrella, it has several policy priorities relating to inpatient safety, focused on improving the culture and workforce of inpatient settings, increasing accountability and oversight and reforming the Mental Health Act.   As part of this work, the charity engages with NHSE, the CQC and the DHSC.

Rethink fed into HSSIB's investigation regarding safe care in the transition from children and young people's mental health services to adult services. Earlier on in that year, which was 2024, Rethink had published a response to the HSSIB report concerning the risk of harm in inpatient units specifically.   The report cited that "the themes are painfully similar".

The charity is part of the Mental Health Policy Group of which Mind is also a member and it works together to improve mental health.   It collaborates by sharing information about policy developments, engaging with Government officials and, on occasion, submitting joint pieces of work, such as consultation responses. The Inquiry has already engaged with other members of that group.

Rethink Mental Illness' campaigning efforts in relation to mental health inpatient services have primarily concentrated on influencing national policy. The charity founded the Schizophrenia Commission in 2011 and has continued to campaign for reform of the Mental Health Act.   This led to the publishing of a report in 2018 titled "No Voice, No Choice: Making the Mental Health Act person-centred".   In 2021 it commissioned two papers on the experience of those under section in response to the Government's White Paper, which we have already heard something about, and in 2022 they submitted evidence to the joint committee on the draft Mental Health Bill.

In 2023 the charity launched a campaign called "Wrap It Up" to persuade Government to reform the Mental Health Act.   Following the Dispatches and Panorama documentaries, the charity published five recommendations to improve inpatient safety.     Those were: firstly, to improve the mental health workforce; prioritise reform of the Mental Health Act; address the continuing rise in out-of-area placements; work collaboratively with experts by experience; and change the attitude from policy makers.

Rethink has conducted a range of research and surveys into the standard of care provided by inpatient wards.   For instance, the CQC funded an engagement project on patient safety and care in specialist inpatient mental health services in 2023.   That project involved hearing views from a diverse range of people as to what made them feel safe or at risk as a patient. There were several recommendations made as a result of that report.    More recently, Rethink Mental Illness issued a response to the review of the CQC in October 2024 citing "significant failings" in how they were holding services to account.

Between July and September 2023, the DHSC funded Rethink to conduct a project on mental health crisis, preventions, response and discharge.   Several key themes were identified, including a need for greater accessibility to healthcare professionals within inpatient settings and improvements to the discharge process.

The organisation was involved in a "Health and Mental Health Inequalities with an Adult Secure Care Provider Collaborative" between April and July that year.   The themes raised on that occasion included issues with diagnosis and care pathways, and restrictive practice.   The recommendations called for future engagement and data collection and a better understanding of inequality amongst other things.       One issue that had been previously identified by Rethink was the "staggering" use of restrictive intervention against black people.

The charity has undertaken projects with NHSE, including assisting in conducting a survey into the views and experiences of people in adult secure services as well as their families and carers to ascertain the impact of Covid, and it also supported the development of a "Carer support and involvement in secure mental health services toolkit".

Rethink participated in the consultation on the new service specifications for adult medium and low secure mental health services.     The themes identified included the importance of good communication and adequate staffing levels.   As part of this, the charity conducted consultations with 80 people living in secure services.

In addition to those, Rethink also worked with NHSE to develop a "Guide to Involvement and Co-Production for Provider Collaboratives".

Mr Winstanley notes in his statement that, although there have been specific examples of policy changes, there is limited evidence as to how practice has evolved following those changes and the effects that the changes may have had on patient outcomes.    One example of a policy change described by him is the 2023 Rapid Review which made several recommendations that were accepted by the Government.     Rethink published a response, firstly to the announcement that a review would take place and, secondly, to the data itself.

Involvement with Essex-based Trusts.

The primary focus of the campaigns conducted by Rethink Mental Illness is on national policy, rather than local issues.   The charity does not currently deliver any services in Essex, since transferring the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies in North East Essex over 10 years ago and it hasn't conducted any research specifically into inpatient services in Essex.

There is, however, a volunteer-run peer support group called Braintree Rethink Carers Support Group which meets monthly to offer support and raise awareness of the impact of mental illness on carers.   Between 2012 and 2019, Rethink ran a regional group in the east of England and in some Essex secure units as part the National Recovery and Outcomes Network commissioned by the NHSE.

It also provided advocacy services in Essex between 2018 and 2024.   During that time, they raised 109 safeguarding concerns with the local authority, and it said that the concerns would have related to issues such as falls, care plans not being reviewed, and allegations about staff.   It's estimated that around 20 of those were related to the local authority or the NHS Trust and their action or inaction.

The Communications and Campaigns team have previously highlighted patient safety issues on inpatient wards, which included responding to the Panorama and Dispatches documentaries.

In response to Dispatches, Rethink conducted an internal review to establish the extent of the charity's knowledge of events in Essex, whether their data reflected the findings and to review their processes for reporting incidents.   The report found that none of the individuals in the programme were known to the charity, and the advocates were unaware of the issues.    Rethink Mental Illness had however reported one concern to the local authority regarding Rochford Hospital and one relating to the Linden Centre.     They considered that appropriate actions had been taken in each case.

In 2019, the charity was contacted by a bereaved mother of a patient treated at an inpatient facility in Essex who asked for support and campaigning for a public inquiry.   At the time, the charity had a policy against getting involved with individual cases.   In 2021, Rethink declined a request by INQUEST for support to call for a statutory inquiry into the deaths and systemic failures in Essex.

However, in January 2023, they supported the transition to a statutory inquiry, submitting evidence to support the change in the Terms of Reference.     The charity also revised its policy against advocating for individual cases, following the events in Essex.     In a response to the BBC investigation into the Priory Group, Rethink published a statement regarding the deaths of specific patients.

The charity has identified several areas for improvements in inpatient care.   It emphasises the barriers it has encountered, which include lack of funding and inconsistent approaches to engaging with charities and people with lived experience, and the statement cites changes within DHSC and the CQC as contributing to the problem and creating difficulties in meaningful engagement.   Mr Winstanley states that implementation of a reformed Mental Health Act and code of practice is a key opportunity to improve inpatient care and safety.

Rethink collects feedback in many ways, particularly through surveys of those with lived experience, and it uses this to inform its campaigning, policy, service improvement and strategic recommendations.

Finally, Rethink provided some evidence in relation to Oxevision and it has highlighted several studies on the topic.   Mr Winstanley notes that there is currently insufficient evidence to suggest that surveillance in inpatient mental health settings is achieving its intended outcomes of improving safety and reducing costs.    He also stated that several studies on the use of Oxevision have been conducted by Oxehealth, the company making Oxevision, presenting a possible conflict of interest.   Ian Callaghan attended a conference in 2024 at which NHSE set out the principles for Oxevision. Rethink Mental Illness is of the view that the opportunities and risks of new technology need to be openly discussed to balance safety with the needs and views of patients.

As outlined at the start of this summary, the Inquiry has sought evidence from and/or is engaging with a number of mental health charities and the Inquiry continues to consider carefully whether and when it should approach other similar organisations to assist.

Chair, that concludes the evidential summaries at this stage.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed, thank you.

**Ms Harris**: Chair, that's all the evidence to be presented to the Inquiry today.    As confirmed yesterday, the Inquiry is not holding a public hearing tomorrow in respect of the evidence relating to Oxevision and the reason for this, as explained by Mr Griffin, King's Counsel, was the late disclosure by EPUT of a statement in relation to major policy and procedural change in their use of Oxevision and, Chair, you have expressed your dissatisfaction in that regard.

The Inquiry will resume its public hearing on Thursday morning, Thursday, 15 May, at 10.00, when the Inquiry will hear from Paul Scott, the Chief Executive of EPUT.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much.   10.00 on Thursday.

**Ms Harris**: Thank you very much.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

*(4.53 pm)*

*(The Inquiry adjourned until 10.00 am on Thursday, 15 May 2025)*

