.. raw:: html

   <a id="hearing-link" href="https://lampardinquiry.org.uk/hearings/hearing-day-26-july-hearing/">Official hearing page</a>

Hearing Day 26 – Jane Maier, Emma Cracknell and Catherine Peck
==============================================================

*(10.04 am)*

**The Chair**: Ms Lea.

**Ms Lea**: Good morning, Chair.   This is the final day of the hearing.     Today we will be hearing from three witnesses, Jane Maier, regarding her brother Daniel Fairman; Emma Cracknell, regarding her mother Susan Spring; and Catherine Peck regarding her brother Richard Elliott.

That will be followed by a closing statement from Counsel to the Inquiry, Nicholas Griffin, King's Counsel.     Before we hear any evidence, however, I would like to point to the fact that today's evidence may in part be distressing and difficult to listen to.     For some, it may not be possible to sit through this session.

Anyone in the hearing room is welcome to leave at any point.     I would like to remind people that emotional support is available for all of those who require it. We have support staff here from Hestia, an experienced provider of emotional support.      There is a private room downstairs where you can talk to Hestia support staff if you require any support at all throughout this hearing. The Hestia support staff are wearing orange-coloured lanyards and scarves, or please speak to maybe of the Inquiry staff; we are all wearing purple lanyards.

If you are watching online, information about

available emotional support can be found on the Lampard

Inquiry website at lampardinquiry.org.uk and under the

support tab near the top right-hand corner.

We want all those engaging with the Inquiry to feel

safe and supported.

Thank you.    Our first witness is ready to be sworn,

please.

Jane Maier
----------

*JANE MAIER (sworn).*

Questioned by Ms Lea
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.   Can you state your full name for the

record, please?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Jane Anne Maier.

**Ms Lea**: You are the sister of Daniel Edward Fairman, who was

born on 23 February 1965 and died on 17 August 2018 at

the age of 53; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: That's correct, yes.

**Ms Lea**: You would like me to refer to your brother as Dan

throughout my questions --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I would do.

**Ms Lea**: -- and you would like me to call you Jane; is that

right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, please.

**Ms Lea**: By way of background, the Inquiry sent a Rule 9 request

for evidence to you -- your legal representatives, in

fact -- on 28 January this year and, in response to that

request, you have provided a written witness statement.

You have a copy of that statement in front of you.

It's 12 pages long and dated 7 April this year.

Could you please turn to the final page of that

statement.   We see that you made a statement of truth

and then you have signed that statement?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: Have you had an opportunity to read through that

statement recently?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I have, yes.

**Ms Lea**: I believe there's one correction to make to a date at

paragraph 10, on page 3, the date "23 May 2019" should

read "23 May 2018"; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: In point 15?

**Ms Lea**: In paragraph 10 -- sorry, on page 3?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, that's correct.

**Ms Lea**: "23 May 2019", that should say "2018"?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, I see where you mean, yes.

**Ms Lea**: Is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, correct.

**Ms Lea**: Aside from that correction, is that document true and

accurate to the best of your knowledge and belief?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: It is.

**Ms Lea**: That witness statement, as you know, will stand as your evidence to the Inquiry.   Although I am going to ask you some questions about it, I won't go through it line by line.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: But I want you to be assured that the Chair and the Inquiry team have read the entire contents of that statement very carefully --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Thank you.

**Ms Lea**: -- and it will form part of the body of evidence upon which the Inquiry will rely?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Lea**: I would also like to indicate that you have provided a commemorative and impact account in relation to Dan and you will be reading out that account at the end of my questions today.   The Inquiry is extremely grateful to you for your written and oral evidence.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: (Witness nodded)

**Ms Lea**: I would like to remind you I won't be asking you to name individual clinicians, so please try not to name any members of staff.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Lea**: If at any point you require a break, please just flag that to me and we can pause.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Thank you.

**Ms Lea**: Your evidence will focus on your concerns in relation to Dan's care and treatment under the care of the Priory in Essex and Essex Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust or EPUT.    You state in your witness statement that the events therein come from both your recollection and also documents that you have.    Helpfully you have listed those as the root cause analysis report, the action plan and the record of inquest; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: That's correct.

**Ms Lea**: I would like to start by setting out a brief timeline of Dan's involvement with Essex mental health services. I will summarise the key dates taken from your witness statement but please do stop me if you feel that I summarise anything incorrectly.    Please also feel free to refer to the statement in front of you at any time throughout my questions.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Thank you.

**Ms Lea**: As I understand it, according to your witness statement Dan's mental health issues started in early 2017; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: That's correct, yes.

**Ms Lea**: You state it seemed as though he went from one specialist to another, without getting better, and so you told him to see one clinician who could address all of his mental health concerns; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: That's correct, yes.

**Ms Lea**: Dan was under the care of The Priory in Essex from March

to May 2018?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Lea**: During his first consultation at The Priory, in March

2018, he was prescribed alternative medication and also

advised to try upping the dosage of another medication

by almost three times --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: -- is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: (Witness nodded)

**Ms Lea**: Following this change in medication, you state that

Dan's mood spiralled out of control.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: (Witness nodded)

**Ms Lea**: You state that your mother took Dan to Broomfield A&E on

two occasions as he was increasingly agitated and told

your mother he felt extremely unwell and "Would do

something".

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: But he wasn't admitted at that stage?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: Can I just check.   Is that two occasions therefore in

March 2018 that he went to A&E?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, around about the same time.

**Ms Lea**: So that's after the first consultation at The Priory but

before the admission?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Do you want me to expand on that at all?

**Ms Lea**: Feel free to, yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: The -- at the meeting with the doctor at The Priory, he -- whilst he suggested upping the dose, the instruction was quite loose and I think Dan was already quite unwell at that time, so he was self-medicating and I don't know how much he took.   He took a lot because he felt very unwell.

.. rst-class:: indented

And we -- I trained -- I have done many things career-wise but, at one point, a long time ago, I trained as a counsellor and I am the oldest sister, so the reason that it seems that I hand out advice is because, within the family, I -- to the best of my ability as a counsellor, I was trying to help Dan.     So that's why I went along to the meetings initially with the doctor, and so on.

.. rst-class:: indented

But -- so he took lots of medication and I think -- I don't know how much he took but even just upping his own dosage made him even more agitated, and then we had nobody -- I had nobody to contact whilst the doctor was away on his holiday.   So that was the first sort of agitating scenario, yes.

**Ms Lea**: Yes, thank you.

Dan was eventually admitted as a private patient to The Priory from 22 March to 23 May 2018.   Was that

Dan's first mental health inpatient admission?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.   Absolutely, yes.

**Ms Lea**: Whilst in the Priory, he made multiple attempts on his

life --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- you state in your witness statement, and suffered

from paranoid delusions --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- something that he hadn't suffered with prior to that

change in medication?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, no.

**Ms Lea**: On 23 May 2018, you received a call from the Priory to

say that they were transferring him to The Lakes without

notice --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- to you; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.   I tried to stall it, actually, I tried to stop

.. rst-class:: indented

them because it was going to be a long way away from me

.. rst-class:: indented

living in London and my mum living sort of nearer

.. rst-class:: indented

Chelmsford Hospital --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- and I begged them not to take him but they did.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.   Dan was therefore on Gosfield Ward at The

Lakes from 23 May until 15 August 2018 --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- when he was discharged?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mm-hm.

**The Chair**: Can I just ask about The Priory transfer: you suggest you don't know what motivated that transfer whether it was --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Oh, I do.   I do, know, yes.     They told us that Dan had had medical -- private medical insurance.      Because he was never sectioned we weren't given access to his private matters, so I didn't know anything about that. But all I -- and they weren't -- that he wasn't well enough to even talk about that to them.

.. rst-class:: indented

So they said that they suspected that the funds were running out so that he needed to be transferred over to an NHS hospital.

**The Chair**: Right, thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: And I said can't we do anything.     But it was just the going so far away was a big anxiety.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Lea**: I think you say further in your statement that you were concerned that one of the reasons for transfer was that Dan was "particularly difficult", the words that you used.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, I have had no experience of mental health whatsoever but Dan, at that point -- even at that point -- thought that he was in prison and that we were faking it and that it wasn't a hospital at all, and he felt that going to The Lakes Hospital was just extending his punishment and very -- incredibly difficult to reason with him by that stage, and I said, "No, you know, Dan, come on, let's stall this, let's put you somewhere which is nearer and easier", and he said "No, no, I must accept my punishment", and off he went.    Yes.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But I don't know what the motivation of the hospital was, I don't know.    I mean, my scant knowledge of The Priory is that it's there seemed to be a lot of young people around with eating disorders and perhaps less -- lesser issues, and I know -- and I guess it was the doctor talking to us -- but I know he tried multiple times already to take his life by then and I -- my gut feeling, which is what I had to use often, was that they found that it was -- he was uncontainable within that environment.   He needed something more secure.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.   You go on to state that a 48-hour follow up call was completed by an agency staff nurse on 16 August 2018 and I know that you have a lot of concerns in relation to that --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: We are skipping to the end, now.   Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- and I will return to that phone call --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- shortly.

Sadly, Dan died on 17 August 2018 by hanging, in your mother's garage --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- within 48 hours of discharge from The Lakes?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: Now that we have been through the timeline.    I would like to ask you some questions regarding your concerns, some of which you have touched upon already.   I am going to start with the decision to discharge Dan and the discharge process because, in your witness statement, you refer to the decision to discharge Dan as by far the worst decision --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- that the clinicians made.

Firstly, in your commemorative and impact account you state that you attended a meeting at The Lakes on 15 August 2018 with Dan and the psychiatrist, not knowing what it was about, only to be told that Dan would be discharged that day.

Had there been any indication before that meeting that Dan would be discharged in the near future?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: The explanation that was given to me by the doctor, at which point I had sort of given up hope of him ever changing his mindset, Dan, was that he, at some point in the future, would have to be discharged and I mustn't expect too much, that it was quite likely that he would never think normally again.

.. rst-class:: indented

I was never given any explanation, medical explanation or psychiatric explanation, of what was going on in Dan's head and just by my own research came across this idea of a delusion disorder.   In America, they talk about it a lot, so there's lots of information on delusion disorders, and it seemed to really make sense for Dan.

.. rst-class:: indented

He absolutely believed that he had done something dreadful and that this was part of his punishment.    And I asked the doctor can you confirm that this is what it is because I am sure that's what's going on and he said "No, no, no, we prefer not to label.   I am not going to say that".

.. rst-class:: indented

But -- and I said "So how do we" -- because it's very difficult to talk to somebody with a delusion disorder because you can't reason with them at all and I didn't, for example, know whether to go with his ideas or to contradict them.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: So he led me -- I was led by the doctor to believe that it would always be the case that he would be deluded, and so we were told -- I just came to accept it that, at some point in the future, he will be discharged --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- and then we would have made -- we were in the process of making proper plans.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: So buying him a little cottage.   He couldn't live with my mother; I'm freelance, divorced on my own; my brother-in-law and sister, he goes shooting animals and he's got guns in his place.    So we were trying to find a place for Dan to stay, so it was in the future --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- and we suspected that -- I did -- in the next six months or so he would be discharged.

.. rst-class:: indented

And we were, he came home for visits.      It was terrifying when he came home for visits because you had to watch him like a hawk and he knew we were watching him.   It was the most horrible experience.

.. rst-class:: indented

So we went out one day to the seaside and he is sitting there having a cup of tea and he wanted to go to the loo, and I had to get my partner to go with him because I thought, "I don't know what he is going to do".   It was so frightening the whole time.

.. rst-class:: indented

Anyway, so I work freelance and, on this particular day -- so work is quite important to me, some days I don't work at all -- I had this phone call to say, "You have got to come to the hospital today to have a meeting about Dan".   Nothing, no warning about why that should be and, by this time, my sister hated going to the meetings, there were a few, my brother also works freelance, he wasn't around, my mother certainly couldn't have stomached one of them.   So I took it upon -- I went.   I was the sort of main contact by that point.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: And I went along to the meeting and it was -- in my recollection and I am pretty sure this is true, it was myself and the doctor and my brother, no one else at all --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- sitting, my brother to the right of me and the doctor behind a table, which is relevant because I had my phone on my lap and I went to make an emergency phone call to my sister, and I didn't know what to do.    He suddenly said, "Yes, well, we've decided, he has made a lot of progress, and that he is going to be discharged".     So we said "Yes", and he said "This afternoon".

.. rst-class:: indented

And I was thrown into an absolute flat spin panic, trying, with my brother sitting next to me -- because all the meetings were humiliating and horrible because always discussing him in front of him -- but trying to contact my sister -- I looked through my messages, I can't find one, I don't think I actually managed to do it -- but to say, "Dan is coming out now, what are we going to do, we've got to make emergency plans now".

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, so I had no forewarning.    There was a sort of in the distance idea but certainly not today, in fact, in two hours' time.

**Ms Lea**: Yes, right.   So you thought it would be at some point within six months and there you are in the meeting finding out it is going to be that day?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: How did Dan himself respond to being informed that he would be discharged that day?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: He was really worried about it.    He put on a play, it seemed, for the situation, with the doctor saying "So, Dan, you know, how -- you feel good, don't you, and you're behaving" -- it was almost like, "Now, you are behaving yourself, aren't you?" and he said, "Oh, yes, yes, I am taking the medication", because in the past, I don't know how I know this, but I know that he would pretend to take medication and not take medication.    He wasn't the easiest of patients, I don't think.    And he said but -- and he listed the things, he said, "I am not strong enough".    But the worst thing was that he listed in his explanation as to why he wouldn't do anything was that he wasn't brave enough and, subsequently, I discovered that that was put in his notes as one of the main reasons for not discharging my brother, that he wasn't brave enough.

**The Chair**: One of the main reasons for discharging him?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: It was listed as one of the reasons.   Just like wildly outrageous that he wasn't brave enough and I thought, you know, that's crazy.   So then we -- do you want me to continue from there, the process, or do you want to ask another question?

**The Chair**: I can take us through in stages?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: So you asked me about Dan and how he felt about it.

**The Chair**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: He gave that little discussion of why it would be okay.

**The Chair**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: We then -- I -- we had to wait a couple of hours for his drugs to be prepared, so I did contact, Ruth, my sister, who lived not far, and we agreed that we would go for a walk with Dan --

**The Chair**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- while his medication was being prepared and that walk in itself was quite scary but all under my umbrella feeling, yes, we have to cope with this, it is going to be the same.   Dan, on that walk through a wood, with the dog and my sister up ahead just pointed to a mushroom and said, "See that white mushroom, that could kill me. I could eat that, that would kill me", and I was like "No, no, Dan", taking on the entire responsibility -- I am not a psychiatrist, I have a very low-level counselling qualification from many years previously -- "That'll be fine, that'll be fine".

.. rst-class:: indented

And when we got back and then he got his medication, he left with me alone, with his medication, and we were in the carpark, and he said, "I'm really frightened, Jane", and I said, "Don't worry, Dan, this is the start of a new beginning, it will all be fine now, it will be all right".

**The Chair**: Did you speak at that meeting to the doctor about your concerns?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I -- honestly I think I had been so -- not brainwashed, but so got used to the idea, this is as good as it gets. And at that meeting, I -- and prior to that meeting, I was beginning to think, no, mental health doesn't work.   There is nothing they can do for my brother and I just have to accept that and take that responsibility on my shoulders.   I really did -- I mean, I am an educated, intelligent woman, I did a lot of reading around it and I just sort of gave up hope that the hospital would be able to do anything.   So I just presumed that we would have to manage with this new totally deluded personality.    He never got back to his brilliant personality that he'd had before this all started.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Lea**: You go on in your commemorative impact statement to say that actually you felt that that you couldn't question the clinicians because, essentially, they were the clinicians and they should know what was best.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, and made -- I made sort of assumptions.   I just thought -- because it was all just -- you know, when you are in an emergency situation, your brain goes into sort of overdrive searching around for ideas.   He was, and it will come out in my commemorative statement, incredibly popular and he had a lot of visitors and, you know, like me with my middle class accent appears to come from a nice family, and it was a very lovely, loving family, and I just came to the conclusion this doctor thinks -- there was a horrible thing that happened while we were in hospital -- Dan was in hospital, where one of the patients threatened him and it was just -- I mean, there were awful things that were happening within the hospital, so I just thought the doctor thinks he is going to be better off at home.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: He is -- and there is nothing they can do from here, so he is going to be better off going home.   You know, subsequently, I have met people who have had friends who've been in -- a friend of mine has a brother who is in hospital and he can be treated and he could have been treated.   But up to that point, I was thinking he is a useless case and they can't do anything for him.

**Ms Lea**: You also state in your witness statement that, at that meeting, Dan said he thought he would be okay.      The drugs weren't working yet but they might do.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, yes, he did say that.

**Ms Lea**: Was that something that the psychiatrist explored with him as to --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, no, no.    It really wasn't, it was quite shockingly sort of normal, you know.    No, it will be fine.   It was just a sort of a push out the door, really.     And Dan was reassuring the doctor, "Yes, yes, I am sure the drugs will work eventually".   It was, like, crazy.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But we didn't have any access to drugs, I didn't know about drugs and because he was never sectioned I didn't know what the drugs were.    I didn't -- I just absolutely trusted the doctor.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   You have touched upon the comment, and in fact it is recorded in Dan's notes, that he wouldn't be "brave enough" --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- to take his own life.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: You further state in your witness statement that that was the only reassurance that you were given in that meeting, really, that nothing was going to happen.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: That these drugs might eventually work.    I already knew or thought I knew that he is never going to change anyway because I had been advised that by the doctor and -- because I asked that question.     I always used to go along with notes to ask the doctor and I have got, you know -- I am quite good at keeping notes, I have got all those notes.    And I specifically said "Is -- what can we expect, what is the prognosis, what can we expect", and he said, "No, he's not going to change".

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: So yes, I just -- I just went out thinking -- there was some mention of some sort of community contact that we would be getting.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But that never happened.   Nobody ever contacted us.

**Ms Lea**: No.    Just finally on the comment of not being "brave enough", just so that we are clear.   Is that something that the doctor was saying to Dan and Dan was essentially repeating that --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: -- or how --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: -- did that conversation go?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: That was part of Dan's explanation to, "Yes, yes, don't worry doctor".   I mean, I think we're probably all a bit people-pleasing in my family.   You know, we like to sort of do the right thing and he was trying to help the doctor --

**Ms Lea**: Right.   Thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- coming out -- you know, it was a ridiculous thing to say.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But I -- on reflection, I mean, he tried so many times, maybe he was trying to convince himself, I don't know.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.   In your witness statement -- I am at paragraph 18 if you would like to refer to it, Jane -- you state that you don't understand why the clinicians didn't take into consideration that Dan had tried to take his life the very week he was discharged by jumping from a high wall within the hospital grounds.   Were you aware of that incident at the time of the meeting on 15 August?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.    No.

**Ms Lea**: When did you learn about that incident?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Very recently and, if I had known that at the time, maybe that would have triggered something more extreme in me.

**Ms Lea**: So that incident wasn't discussed at the meeting?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Absolutely not.   No.   I thought that had gone -- and I am sure it was even mentioned, you know, he hadn't tried recently.   He tried so many times, it was sort of -- you know, almost a bit of a joke, really.   You know, he constantly, imaginatively tried but, at that meeting, it was sort of -- I was made to feel that that phase had -- we had passed that phase now and that I certainly didn't have any idea that he was going to try again.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But, you see, you know, with the mushrooms and things, you know, it was really confusing, really.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: In the moment of the meeting, when I -- when it was discussed -- the fact that he tried really recently was definitely not brought up because I would have wanted to have talked about that --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- there and then with the doctor with Dan.   You know, "Well, you've done it a week ago, Dan, that's not" -- but the mushroom thing, I just thought he was sort of toying with that a bit and -- but obviously not.

.. rst-class:: indented

I mean, a lot of things, sort of reflectively, I thought, no, you were trying to tell us and I wasn't listening because I was listening to what the doctor had advised, which was he's always going to be deluded.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   Something else that you touch upon in your witness statement in relation to the discharge meeting is that the clinicians knew that your mother was 83 and vulnerable and, in your view, it was wholly inappropriate to discharge him to live with her, and you also had concerns about her safety if he had a psychotic episode.

Firstly, do you know if anyone from the ward spoke to your mother regarding the decision to discharge Dan into her care?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, I don't think anybody ever spoke to her.

**Ms Lea**: You say the clinicians knew that she was 83 and vulnerable.   Is that a conversation that you had had with them?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I don't know quite how that information was imparted to the hospital but what I do know was they didn't -- there was no discussion in that meeting about where he was going to go at all.   It was just like "Over to you", whatever you was -- and because we, as I have explained, you know, I really didn't want him to go to my sister and brother-in-law and he couldn't come to me, I had got a job starting the next day.

.. rst-class:: indented

So we just thought that over, you know, very short term, he should go back to my mum, me thinking that he was safe to do so, that the drugs were not quite working but they would be working.    But, on reflection, I believe that she was very vulnerable --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- that if he had -- she had interrupted him when he was trying to take his life, that could have been lethal.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Because he was totally deluded and I dread to think what might have happened, and it was never looked at.    And I have mentioned somewhere, which sounds very sort of melodramatic but, you know, that, if Dan had been a Romanian puppy about to be adopted, they check out have you got a fence, have you got a cat, have you got children, have you got these things, and then my -- equally, if it was a medical patient, my partner [redacted] was very ill [redacted] and I looked after him when he got home and he got a terrible temperature, but it was okay because I had a hotline that I could ring and I could say -- I did, I did. I said, you know, "[redacted] is really, really hot", but there was nothing given to me as back up at all.

**The Chair**: Was your mother frightened of him?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: That's a really good question.    She relied -- it was me as back up all the time, and she started to -- she was panicked the first time, when he wanted to go to A&E, because there was something in when he said to her "I don't know what I am going to do", there was a slight feeling then of "I could hurt you", and that was never said but he was out of control.

.. rst-class:: indented

Also, when he went to stay that weekend with my mum her even older sister was there, so there were two of them, and she thought, again, the sort of white coat thing, he's coming out of hospital, he is better now. But the very first night she rang me and she said, "Dan's really not feeling very happy, he feels very concerned.   Can you" -- Mum relies on me, I am like the family therapist -- "Can you give him a bit of reassurance?"

.. rst-class:: indented

So I spoke to him and he said, "Oh, I feel horrible, Jane", and I said, "Don't you worry, I have had an operation, I have been in hospital, you do feel a bit disorientated when you come out of hospital, you will be fine".   And I never was once told to watch him like a hawk because especially when suicidal tendency patients are discharged from hospital those first 48 hours are crucial, and you need to watch him and you need to be aware.

.. rst-class:: indented

And he gave us so many signs.   When we were in the carpark, he said to me, "I am frightened, Jane", he looked at the mushrooms, he got me to take him for -- he wanted to go for a drink of McDonald's suddenly and get a sort of salted caramel milkshake and I said, "Well, that's a bit strange, Dan".     But now, on reflection, I know it was like a sort of -- he knew what he was going to do and it was like going to his execution having a last meal.   And then Nick -- I can't remember and I keep forgetting to ask Nick -- mental block -- my brother, he said something strange to him too.

.. rst-class:: indented

But the -- he knew exactly what he was going to do, and he planned it because my mum has -- she's quite into her own appearance and looks after herself and has a hairdresser come every Thursday morning and he knew that she would be -- the hairdresser would be there so she wouldn't hear.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.   You state in your witness statement that it's recorded in relation to the 15 August meeting that family members were present and agreed to the discharge to your mother's home --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: It was me.

**Ms Lea**: -- but it was just you and you did not agree to the discharge?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: It was just me.   Ruth didn't want to come, Nick was off -- no, it was just me.

**Ms Lea**: Do you know whether other family members were notified about that meeting or were you telephoned --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: It was real quick one, "You've got to come now".

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: There was nobody else, no.     And, also, I didn't know what it was about.   I didn't know it was going, "He is going to be discharged today".

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: We would have made some sort of plans.    I mean, at the end of my commemorative statement I read one by his very, very good friend Richard Railton, and Richard said, "He could have come and stayed with me".    It was sort of panic stations, "What are we going to do with Dan for the next few days until we sort him out?"

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   Another thing you point out in your witness statement is that there wasn't a qualified nurse in the discharge meeting?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Not in my recollection.

**Ms Lea**: But the investigation seemed to suggest that there were two qualified nurses available and so you query why they --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, but they weren't there.     No.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: It was like a little sort of cosy chat, just the three

.. rst-class:: indented

of us.

**Ms Lea**: You also query why the care coordinator didn't meet with

you before Dan was discharged because that was in the

discharge plan.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.    Nobody.   We were just told that at some point

.. rst-class:: indented

during the week there would be somebody get in touch and

.. rst-class:: indented

it was very vague, no one specifically.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   You have referenced planning that you were doing

as a family with a view to Dan being discharged over the

period of six months --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- at some point within that six months.    Do you recall

anything that was within Dan's formal discharge plan

that you were presented with that day?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: We weren't given a formal discharge plan.

**Ms Lea**: Nothing.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I was given nothing in writing whatsoever.

**Ms Lea**: I think you said to us earlier that it was two hours

between you finding out that Dan was being discharged --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- and you actually leaving the building with him to take

him to your mother's house?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Just in time to get the medication sorted, it wasn't for anything else other than that.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.    So between that meeting and you leaving with Dan, the only conversations really with anyone else were in relation to his medication; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I didn't have a conversation about it.      We went away. I drove him to Ruth and we went for a walk and then I came back for him to collect his medication, and we didn't talk to anybody else.       He just collected his medication and that was that.

**The Chair**: Was there any suggestion at any stage that they needed the bed?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.   No.    No.   That would have been horrendous.   No. I don't know why.      I just thought -- I don't know, I think this guy, the doctor, thought, "Oh, well" -- this is how I read it, you know, "Not much we can do for him, he would be better off with his happy family".

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Lea**: You have made reference to some sort of contact with a community health contact person.      You say in your witness statement you were given no details and had no contact details.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: Does that mean Dan obviously didn't have those details either?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I don't know.      I don't know.   Because he -- I think there was a mention at some point of him having had a phone call made to him but his phone was taken away by the police and we didn't have access to his phone, and by that -- I mean, he never stopped being in this strange mindset, so if somebody had contacted him, well, it wouldn't have made any difference, actually.   The family were not involved whatsoever.

**Ms Lea**: So you didn't know when that contact was supposed to come or who from, in terms of their role?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, no.   It was a bit like I was on an ice-rink, and it was, like, whoosh, "Off you go, now you are on your own".

**Ms Lea**: You have already mentioned to us your concerns in relation to the lack of information and guidance that you were provided with --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- at the time of Dan's discharge.   You have referenced both in relation to assessing whether your mother's home was suitable for him to be discharged to --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Lea**: -- and also in relation to warning signs for you to look to out for?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: Is there anything further you would like to say on that lack of information?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.    You know, you try -- and I, like everybody who's on my side of this world, wants changes to be made so that these things don't happen again, and I really felt that there could have been two simple forms asking the patient, "Are you happy to go home?    What are you feeling?    Are you sure that your medication is working? How have you been recently?", and that would have been them -- and, "Are you happy about where you are going?"

.. rst-class:: indented

But on our side, we could have done -- and then looking into where he was going: is he going to a safe environment, tick that box.

.. rst-class:: indented

And but for us, these are -- be aware because this is a risky time, just as if he had come home with a heart operation or, you know, something else wrong with him, cancer, and then, "If you have any concerns at all, because you should be on guard, then this is a hotline that you can ring, this is a number". Something --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- rather than feeling abandoned.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   So, essentially, two comprehensive and properly implemented discharge checklists?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, really simple.   You would have it after a dental operation, you know, just "If you bleed, this is what you do, don't worry, contact us".     Nothing.   Never heard from them.    I think there was a phone call made some time down the line as a sort of cursory, "Sorry to hear", type phone call.

**Ms Lea**: Do --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But nobody contacted me and I was of the prime person by this stage and had been for some time.

**Ms Lea**: Do you have a view as to how that information should be provided, whether that's a face-to-face meeting, a leaflet, website links?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Definitely not, just a piece of paper plonked in front, I think people don't read leaflets.    I don't know, I'm not very good at reading leaflets.    Just a sort of, on that day, "These things should be checked".

**Ms Lea**: Is it fair to say then that, given that there was an apparent lack of a discharge plan, you don't think that you were sufficiently equipped to support Dan in the community?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Not at all.

**Ms Lea**: I am going to turn now to talk about medication, if I may.   You have touched briefly upon it.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: We know that Dan's first consultation at the Priory was March 2018 where the medication change came, and you have also touched upon the fact that there was reference to try upping the dosage --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- and actually what that meant.    You went with Dan to that appointment; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: You were physically in the room when he was having the conversation?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I was next to him, mm-hm.

**Ms Lea**: You say in your witness statement that Dan increased the dosage as per the advice.   I think you indicated earlier --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: The advice was "Try this, try that".

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: He was not -- really not capable of fathoming that one out, really.    He had also broken into -- not broken -- my mum has always [had some medication in her home] , historically, and she's not mentally ill at all [redacted] .   So he knew that she got some medication, [redacted] or one of those things, stuffed in a drawer somewhere, and he got a hold of that.      He was very much in need of proper help.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: He was feeling a bit frantic by the time he got into The Priory.   He had been -- he had had sleep issues --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- terrible, and those sleep issues sort of spiralled out of control.

**Ms Lea**: You say that there was a lack of proper guidance and support from the clinician at The Priory --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- because he then went on holiday for two weeks with essentially no handover to anybody else --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, no, that's right.

**Ms Lea**: -- is that right?    You go on to say that Dan wasn't given any specialist advice on the effects of different medications, when they start working and whether he should be careful with mixing medications?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Not in my hearing.

**Ms Lea**: As far as you are aware, was he given that advice at any stage before he died?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I don't, I don't know.    I don't know.   I mean, I presumed once he was at the hospital they would have, you know, measured it and given whatever doses they thought were necessary.

**Ms Lea**: You have touched upon the fact that Dan was never sectioned whilst he was an inpatient --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- and you state in your witness statement you, as a family, feel that staff should have considered sectioning Dan at The Priory when he tried to take his life?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Well, my scant knowledge is that, if he had been, we could perhaps have had more information about him because the whole confidentiality issue may have meant that we were given less information than we would otherwise have been given.

**Ms Lea**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I guess, I don't know.    As I say, I am new to this whole thing, really.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.    What you say in your witness statement is that you believe, if he had been sectioned, he would have been informed about his mental health more substantively. Are you referring there actually then to you as a family?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: As a family, we -- perhaps if he had been sectioned, we would have been given more information about him but because he wasn't maybe it was -- some of it was to do with confidentiality.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I don't know -- I don't know why they never did.

**Ms Lea**: You go on to say that this is something that your brother raised at a meeting with the Trust on 13 September 2024 --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- after Dan had died.    But you actually didn't get a response as to why he was never sectioned?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, no.   It was a very defensive.    I tried over the years to raise all the issues that I was unhappy with, and I wrote to various different people, never got any response, and I have a friend who is a medical registrar and she's -- like, I was at school with her, she is a very good friend and she knew Dan.    She said, "Keep trying, Jane, because I think I have heard that there's things happening at the moment".     And I got in touch with EPUT, went round -- I don't know, some email I sent hit home and immediately I had a phone call from a solicitor representing EPUT and I thought, "That's interesting, they are obviously worried that things aren't right, that things are going wrong".

.. rst-class:: indented

And a Zoom meeting was organised on 13 September with my brother, Nick, and I., and there was a panel, I don't know exactly what the job titles were, there was definitely the lawyer and then there were two medical personnel, and I put to them -- we put to them our concerns and I certainly did.

.. rst-class:: indented

And everything I said, they said -- they talked to me as if I was talking about ancient history, Victorian times, "Ah, well, but it's all changed now.    Yes, yes, it was bad, but it's not the same now.    It's all changed, it would never happen nowadays".

.. rst-class:: indented

And so I felt sort of almost put in my place, really, belittled that, some years down the line, I should be complaining about stuff because that was then and this is now and it's not the same nowadays.

.. rst-class:: indented

And you asked me a question and I sort of -- about the sectioning and --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Well -- and in that meeting, it just felt very defensive.    One of the medical personnel said, "Oh, yes but he was being properly medicated", and I said, "Well, it wasn't working then, was it?"

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   You touched upon then the fact that, at that meeting, you were being told, "Well, everything has changed now".   Were you ever provided with any specific information as to what changes --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: -- had been put in place?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, no, and I don't know whether -- I think it's appropriate to say that when -- I'm jumping around a bit -- but because of my friend, who's a medical registrar, she helped me when -- before the inquest, to write our concerns and at the inquest my document that Jane had read through with me was presented to the coroner and instead of -- she said several significant things, the coroner, but one of the things she did was read my statement to the EPUT representative and she said, "Look, this is a catalogue here of things that have gone wrong, what are you going to do about it?" And they said, "Well, first of all, we are very sorry and then we will go through all of these points, we will make sure changes are made and we will keep in touch with the family and we will let them know how these changes are being made".   And she -- they never contacted me, ever.   Ever.

**Ms Lea**: Is it right --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Didn't hear anything.

**Ms Lea**: Sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Sorry.

**Ms Lea**: Is it right that they promised the coroner they would contact you within 48 hours with an update on --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: If I put that earlier on I probably remember -- it might have been one of my notes.      But they did, at 48 -- never, they never contacted me.      So we never knew. I just -- yeah, I really -- the whole episode made me feel there is no point to mental health care.

**Ms Lea**: Just turning, if we can, to talk about Dan's diagnoses for a second?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: In terms of formal diagnoses that Dan received, sitting here today, do you know what he was formally -- what condition --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: It seems, I've seen that it was mentioned somewhere that he did suffer from delusions but, as far as I am concerned, that was my idea, I stuffed that one in and I'm a layperson.   I think that were other things mentioned but, certainly, it's all sort of new information, part of the lot of information that we have not had up until now.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   So we can go through them.   But, first of all, you state in your statement that you feel Dan's symptoms weren't understood by the clinicians treating him and you refer to the fact that he was constantly --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I don't know.

**Ms Lea**: -- paranoid and thought that he was a prisoner, essentially?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.   He did, yes.

**Ms Lea**: Was that at The Priory and The Lakes?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Well, no -- yes, right from fairly early on he did.      But at the -- by the time we got to -- there was a meeting after about a week of him being discharged from The Priory, and I was at that meeting with the doctor and it was a really disturbing meeting because it seemed clear that they hadn't got or hadn't read Dan's notes because the doctor -- Dan -- and it was all around the sort of Me Too time.    He was very popular, always had lovely girlfriends, they were all ones that visited him in hospital.   He started thinking he had given people HPV viruses, you know, sexually transmitted viruses, and then he even came up with the idea that he might be a rapist.

.. rst-class:: indented

And during that meeting -- I mean, that was -- it was just spiralling out of control.   I mean, in the beginning I was trying to reason with him, when before he flew into it, you know, "This is just a nonsense, Dan", he described what led me to think -- him to think these things.   But, nevertheless, the doctor turned to Dan and said, "So, are you a rapist?"   And I just thought, "Wow, you're just buying into his delusion, that's just madness, for want of a better word".

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: That's crazy.   You have obviously not read that he's -- he's not under arrest, he's not a criminal, he's done nothing.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, it was really shocking.

**Ms Lea**: You refer in your witness statement to the fact that you were surprised to find out that not all of Dan's medical notes made it over with him in the transfer to The Lakes, just a few documents, essentially?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Well, looking -- and I have been along to some of the earlier meetings and I am trying to understand what's been going wrong, and it seems like there is a massive problem with notes flying all over the place, notes not being kept, notes inadequately written in the first place by people who are not in the right position to make them.

.. rst-class:: indented

It seems a huge issue.      I never saw anything in writing before when Dan was in hospital.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   Just turning back to any formal diagnosis.   You helpfully set out in your witness statement that the investigation report states that Dan was diagnosed with anxiety and depression --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Lea**: -- that that isn't something you as a family were ever informed --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, no.

**Ms Lea**: -- prior to his death.   You go on to state that he was under the care of the specialist psychosis team but, again, you weren't aware that he was ever diagnosed with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Not at all, no.

**Ms Lea**: Finally, you touch on a delusional disorder which you have explained to us that's something that you raised and you were told "No, no, no, we don't label things"?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: But, actually, looking at Dan's notes and the investigation --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: They put that.

**Ms Lea**: -- it appears he was diagnosed with that condition?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, mmm.

**Ms Lea**: You go on to state that, as a family, had you been aware of any of those formal diagnoses, then you could have been informed about what to look out for, how to cope when his mental health deteriorated and what questions to ask to understand how best to support Dan?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I think, if we had been fully aware of the situation, we would have said, "We are sorry but we don't think we can cope with him at home at the moment, unless -- until he is further stabilised and we are assured that he is not going to try to do this immediately".

**Ms Lea**: Keeping on the topic of lack of communication.   In your commemorative and impact account, you explain an occasion where you were asked to go to Broomfield Hospital with Dan for an MRI scan after --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- an attempt on his life, and what you say in your witness statement is that, from that point on, you were always afraid that he would never stop trying --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: -- and, as far as you are concerned, he never returned to the personality that he had before those delusions?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: He didn't.   No, he never came back.

**Ms Lea**: When you had that realisation, was that something you were able to discuss with any of the clinicians?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, because I said, "Is he always going to be like this?", and I was told -- now I just thought is he ever going to get "better", and I was told, "No, you just have to cope with the fact that this is him now and it is quite likely he will never return to the way he was before".

**Ms Lea**: In your witness statement, you say that you don't understand why Dan's attempts on his life and threats, for example informing staff at The Lakes that he had previously made 14 attempts on his life --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: He was writing a book about it.

**Ms Lea**: -- writing a book, you don't understand why that wasn't taken seriously and why you as a family weren't ever informed; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: We knew that it was -- we weren't told blow by blow.       It was almost as if it was the sort of thing that they didn't went to burden us with.    But we were aware that he had tried.   I mean, I was very shocked when he first went into The Priory and they told us he tried almost immediately there.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But by the time we got -- you know, that was still at The Priory.   I had to go to the Broomfield Hospital and I went with a nurse and the taxi driver and me in the back and, by that time, I was frightened that, if he got out the car -- I knew that he was like a constant risk by that point.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: You have mentioned already the meetings that you attended on the ward and how awful you felt that those were.   How often were those meetings taking place, do you remember?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I don't remember.   I went to perhaps two or three.    They were perhaps monthly.    I don't remember how often they were.   My sister went to one.   She didn't go again because she just thought it was horrible, it was just a lot of clinicians around my brother as if he didn't exist, really, and she found it awful.

.. rst-class:: indented

So one of the reasons, I have stressed that in my document, is that I feel that I have compiled this not as an individual but also with some of the thoughts of my brother and sister.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Because it's not the Jane Show.    It's, you know, us as a family and how we tried to cope, and my sister found

.. rst-class:: indented

that particularly distressing.    I didn't -- I didn't

.. rst-class:: indented

feel as strongly about that but it did -- they were, it

.. rst-class:: indented

was odd, those meetings, with him sitting there, while

.. rst-class:: indented

we discussed him around him, as if he didn't have

.. rst-class:: indented

a right to discuss himself.

**Ms Lea**: Did Dan ever discuss with you about how he felt about

those meetings?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: No.    I am going to turn next to the transfer.   I think

we have covered most ground here --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- transfer from The Priory to The Lakes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: So it's your understanding that the private health care

was coming to an end?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: Also perhaps Dan was a "little difficult"?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: They are the words that you have used.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: So he was transferred to The Lakes.    Not all of his

documentation made it across with him.   In terms of the

time from your mother's home and from your home, you

made reference earlier to the fact that The Lakes was

much further away --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: You go on to say in your witness statement that, following that transfer and the lack of input from you as a family, you felt totally let down.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: Would you like to say any more about that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I just think we were -- yes, as I said abandoned. I think it was sort of like, "Over to you".    And I sort of felt sorry for the medical health system.   I thought, "Oh, well, you know, it is a bit like magic, really. They can't" -- I got to the stage where I was just desperate -- they can't do anything.   You know, he's a lost case and I know that they can cure cancers and I know that they can sort out people with heart conditions.   But I guess the British -- I mean, I'm being honest -- the British mental health system can't -- it is more complicated, perhaps, dealing with mental health and they can't cope with mental health patients, they don't know what to do with them, and that's what it felt like with my brother.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.   Thank you.   Turning to the follow-up care when Dan was discharged from The Lakes and, in particular, the 48-hour call that you received.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: You question the quality of that call in your witness statement because the investigation report concludes that there was very little information available in relation to that call, the information wasn't recorded contemporaneously, the staff member entry was made on behalf of that staff member by somebody else --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: -- and your concern that it wasn't actual follow up, it was essentially a tick box exercise?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I didn't know at the time -- I wasn't aware of there having been a call and because I never had access to Dan's phone and then Dan's phone was taken away by the police, I didn't know that there had been.   I've seen that it was recorded that there was but I wasn't aware of that call --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- and he didn't mention a call.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: And my mother, who he was living with, you know, he was anxious, that call was never mentioned.

**Ms Lea**: I think you go on in your witness statement to say you are concerned as to whether the person making that call even had access to Dan's medical records?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, I know nothing about that call.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I think, if it had been handled properly, it would have

.. rst-class:: indented

been a call to the family as well, as he wasn't

.. rst-class:: indented

capable -- they must have known -- of even handling

.. rst-class:: indented

a call.    He wasn't the appropriate person to be dealing

.. rst-class:: indented

with.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.     Turning then to the quality of that

investigation report.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: You state that it's incorrect for the report to record

that Dan had a good period of leave with his sisters

without any concerns, and you provide the examples that

you have just given to us in relation to pointing out

mushrooms --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: -- and also reference to guns at your --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Brother-in-law's.

**Ms Lea**: -- brother-in-law's property?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes, mm-hm.

**Ms Lea**: Were you able to report those concerns to any staff

members at all, after those periods of leave?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: We don't -- we didn't really have much contact with

.. rst-class:: indented

them.     I mean, I was -- I just -- you know, I can't take

.. rst-class:: indented

responsibility for what happened on myself and I refuse

.. rst-class:: indented

to.

.. rst-class:: indented

But I -- I felt, okay, well, this is the way forward, let's look at the bright side, like, one day Dan played Scrabble, we played Scrabble as a family. Maybe that's a good sign, maybe I should say to the doctor, "Oh, yes, he is doing things like playing Scrabble".   So I stuck a few positives in because it is really -- it is like suddenly not believing in Father Christmas or something.   It is like only afterwards, when it all went horribly wrong, did I know that all those things were signs but, at the time, I was trying to think, "Okay, we have got to cope with this, he is still going to be deluded, so we have got to make it work".

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But I don't -- I remember -- and there was varying degrees of panic.   I mean, Jeremy, my brother-in-law, who wouldn't mind his name being mentioned, I think that's fine, he's got a locked gun cabinet, and one day we were sitting in the garden on a beautiful sunny day and suddenly Jeremy shouted, "Get away!" and Dan was looking, trying to find the key.   So there were things happening all the time.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: And we were just trying to cope with it, really.

**Ms Lea**: In terms of any periods of leave that Dan did have, were you informed about those in advance and able to prepare for them?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: They were just sort of like outings.   He didn't ever stay away.   He was sort of taken out for a couple of hours or I don't remember him staying.   I might be incorrect in that but I don't remember him staying away. They were just -- and it was, as I say, like the time when he wanted to go off to the loo, it was like dealing with a dangerous dog or something, it was like, "Oh, God", and he knew.   He said, "You're watching me, aren't you?", and we did have to watch him because it was a feeling that it was imminent that he would try and do something else.

**Ms Lea**: In relation to the investigation report, you say that it's insufficient because it didn't take into account what you went through as a family at all --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: -- and, in fact, you weren't contacted as part of the investigation --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: -- as it says that you were?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No.

**Ms Lea**: Would you like it say anything further about that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Well, because ultimately, our wish is that those changes that I was promised in that Zoom meeting last year would

.. rst-class:: indented

be made, at the very least I would like to know that

.. rst-class:: indented

things -- somebody else doesn't have to go through what

.. rst-class:: indented

we have gone through.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.   Just touching on that Zoom meeting.   I think

it's right, isn't it, that you emailed the Trust on

18 April 2024 --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: -- over five years later --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: -- asking, "Has anything been done in response to the

issues raised by the coroner?"   You received a response

on 11 July stating that you would be provided with

an update by 19 July?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: Did you receive an update by 19 July?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I don't think so, no.   No, we didn't receive anything

.. rst-class:: indented

substantial and then there was this just apology and the

.. rst-class:: indented

meeting will be -- we thought it was funny, Friday,

.. rst-class:: indented

13 September, so I remember that date.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: And then we had a Zoom meeting on that day.

**Ms Lea**: I think you have answered this already but did you leave

that meeting feeling reassured that everything had been

addressed since Dan died?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, no, no, I thought they were frightened because they know that, actually, big mistakes have been made and now people are being called to account.

**Ms Lea**: Jane, I would like now like to go through your recommendations for change?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Mmm.

**Ms Lea**: Before I do, can I just touch upon your suggestion of a checklist or two checklists, in fact, again.   Is there anything further that you would like to say in relation to that recommendation that there be two checklists?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: No, because I think it's -- I mean, other people I know -- because I have talked to other people who have had similar family things happen -- and I think Dan's is quite a simple story, really, and I think the mistakes that were made were quite fundamental and could so easily be changed and I don't understand -- I have worked in lots of different areas -- why such simple things couldn't be done --

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- and they are -- it is like the medical side is more grounded and more efficient and perhaps better funded, but it's the simple things that, in our case, I think could have saved his life.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.

Amanda, please can we have paragraph 35.1 onwards on the screen on page 8.   Thank you.

Jane, you might feel that actually we have touched

upon all of your recommendations.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.

**Ms Lea**: But I will just give you a moment to cast your eye over

them.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Thank you.    (Pause)

.. rst-class:: indented

Yes.      I mean, I also think that, in addition to

.. rst-class:: indented

that, it's just comes down to contact.    Somebody to

.. rst-class:: indented

communicated with when you are worried.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.    I have two questions arising from your

recommendations.    One is: you say in your witness

statement that staff didn't make any attempts to

understand Dan and learn about his likes and dislikes

and you feel that he may have benefited from more

tailored treatment; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Well, yes, hopefully, yes, yes.

**Ms Lea**: And --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: You know, I can't make judgements about psychiatric care

.. rst-class:: indented

because I don't understand it.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: But it felt like he was slightly sort of pushed on one

.. rst-class:: indented

side in terms of his mental health.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: And also I think it was sort of inappropriate that it

.. rst-class:: indented

was -- it came to be relied on that I should be the one making the suggestions.

**Ms Lea**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Like, I would try quite hard to get him to have some sort of talking therapy and he never had that.

**Ms Lea**: No.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: And I just was so out of my depth talking to him and him saying these bizarre things and, you know, it's really hard.    You don't know whether to run with it, and he would say, "You are tricking me, this is a prison, this isn't a hospital", and I don't know whether -- yes, no. It was it's a really hard one to deal with.

.. rst-class:: indented

But because of this curious lack of explanation from the hospital and us pushing -- putting things back in it felt like I was being relied on, and I thought, okay then, I'll have to manage.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.

Amanda, can we take those recommendations down, please.

Thank you, Jane.    I don't have any further questions for you at the moment.      Chair, do you have any questions?

**The Chair**: No, I don't, thank you.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you.   Jane, as I have indicated, you have also provided your commemorative and impact account in relation to Dan.      I understand you would now like to read that out.      Can I check, would you like a break before we proceed or are you happy to ...

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: I suppose I could have five minutes, actually because it's quite a tough one.

**Ms Lea**: Chair, may we have a 10-minute break?

**The Chair**: Yes, of course, 10 minutes.

*(11.10 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(11.29 am)*

**The Chair**: Ms Lea.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you, Chair.    Jane, whenever you are ready, please go ahead and read your commemorative and impact statement in relation to your brother Dan.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Thank you.    There is two.   The second one is Dan's friend, so I am reading it on his behalf as well, and in my statement there is information there, it is a sort of compilation, my brother and sister have also put their thoughts in.     So it's, you know, family and representative, rather than just me.     And I hope I can do it.

.. rst-class:: indented

My name is Jane Maier and this statement concerns my brother Daniel Fairman, or Dan, as we called him.       My brother was one of four children in a very close, happy family.    Dan was a lively charming child with a lot of energy.    He had real sense of humour and could charm everyone.   Dan always had lots of friends and our mum was very hospitable and I remember that once he invited the whole cricket team home for tea.

.. rst-class:: indented

To our sister, Ruth, and I, he could just seem like the annoying younger brother, though our relationships with him grew as we all matured.   When we were children, my parents all that well off so we never went abroad but I really remember enjoying happy family holidays together to the Isle of Wight and Wales.   As adults, the four of siblings chose to go again with our mum and dad and take our children this time, to have exactly the same family holidays in the places we had been so happy as children.

.. rst-class:: indented

Dan went to St John's School in Billericay.     He was a popular student and left school with 10 O Levels and then he attended King Edward V Grammar School in Chelmsford, where he obtained three A Levels.   He obtained a degree in estate management from London South Bank University.   He worked in London with commercial property firms, Holbrooks and later GL Hearn.   He focused on identifying and acquiring restaurant sites for the major chains, including Prezzo and Pizza Express.    In a letter of condolence that we received from a colleague from GL Hearn, it said of Dan, "He could be mercurial but always there with gentleness and calm when you really needed him".      Following GL Hearn, Dan worked at Strathmore Property Developments Limited, still in the restaurant sector but this time with an emphasis on development.

.. rst-class:: indented

There was quite a big age gap between Dan and our youngest brother, Nick, so we were four, so their deeper friendship really developed in adulthood and became particularly close.   Dan didn't have children or a family home so he spent a lot of time not only working with Nick but staying with him, his wife, Sally, and their son, Will.   When Dan started to become ill, it was Nick who struggled to help him because they were working together and horrendously it was Nick who found his lifeless body and tried to revive him, knowing as he did so that it was too late.

.. rst-class:: indented

In 2011, Dan and Nick decided to work together promoting land for residential development.      Their area of search was East Anglia.      Land promotion is a long-winded and stressful business.      A promoter spends considerable time and money speculatively trying to secure planning permission for housing development, usually with great resistance from both local councils and residents.   With his charming nature, Dan was very good at identifying and securing new opportunities by convincing landowners that he was honest, skillful and tenacious.

.. rst-class:: indented

My brothers, Nick and Dan, and our father Eddie, shared a love of sport.   Like our mum and dad, Dan was a keen tennis player and the three men used to love watching football together on a Sunday, while Ruth, my sister, Mum and I were in the kitchen cooking lunch.        My parents had a long and happy marriage and were together from the late teens until my dad died in his 70s.

.. rst-class:: indented

At the inquest into Dan's death, which took place in January 2019, the coroner stated that the cause of his suicide was a consequence entirely of his mental health. There were no sort of background triggers at all.      She considered that it was clear that he had had very happy family background and personal life.    The coroner agreed that there had been serious errors with my brother's care by EPUT, which I have mentioned.

.. rst-class:: indented

Dan was passionate about nature and wildlife.       As an adult he managed deer herds in Essex and Norfolk on behalf of a number of different landowners.    He held a firearms licence for over 20 years.    In order to obtain his licence, it would have been necessary for him not to have had a history of mental health problems declared by his doctor, and he never did.

.. rst-class:: indented

Dan was incredibly caring of other people and had lots of friends, who he was really generous to.    He really made a big effort to keep in touch with all of his friends and was so loved and respected by them that over 250 people came to his funeral.

.. rst-class:: indented

Dan travelled extensively around the world and he made a number of friends overseas --

.. rst-class:: indented

I am not sure I can do it -- I can, I can.

**Ms Lea**: Jane, would you --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: -- some of whom attended his funeral.    I recall consoling three German men, these great big beefy men who were crying at grave side.   My sister and I had to reassure them that it was okay to cry.   Dan was always asked to be best man at his friends' weddings.      He was knowing to give particularly funny speeches.

.. rst-class:: indented

The next bit is quite a tough one but I will do that and then it will be fine.

.. rst-class:: indented

One of my favourite memories of my wonderful brother is that on my birthday I had a party and Dan put on some Cajun music.   He grabbed me by the hand then danced me round and round in a wild dance and it was wonderful I so admired his love of life and of seizing the moment.

.. rst-class:: indented

Dan didn't have children so he gave all his paternal affection to his niece and nephews and his best friends' children.   In return they all absolutely adored Dan, with his exuberant personality and fun-loving ways.      He always wanted to put fun even into the most ordinary situations.    He was godfather to several children and gave each of them and his niece and nephews individual attention.    He truly cared about them.   He was interested in them.    They have all been devastated by his death.

.. rst-class:: indented

I was born in 1958 and Dan was six years younger than me.     My relationship with him really grew when we were adults.    We both lived in London, while our younger brother and sister lived near our parents and were more conventional about their choice of lifestyle.       Dan once told me he thought we were the wild ones and the black sheep of the family.    We were not really wild though, we just chose to live further away from home and were both fun-loving extroverts with lively social lives. I always felt uplifted when I was with Dan and proud that he was my brother.    He was charming and he was a joy to be with and we used to have really good times together, having a drink in the pub or a meeting out together.

.. rst-class:: indented

I am a make-up artist and I remember making pixie ears for him and his best friend Dickie to wear to a fancy dress party.    To prepare for the make-up, Dan and I went to a make-up shop for glue and prosthetic pieces and I remember at the checkout he wouldn't let purchase a bag for the lots of little bits that we had purchased and had to carry.     He was insistent that having a bag was environmentally bad and I was impressed by his concern.    This was way before such things became an issue and environmental concern.

.. rst-class:: indented

Dan was a wonderful man, he was so generous, so funny.   He loved to entertain everyone at every opportunity.   He did wild things.   For my 50th birthday he presented me a huge wheel of cheese, which was a strange one.    At Christmas one year, he had a regifting theme and he gave our grandma my mobile phone and wrapped up Mum's old lipstick to give back to Mum.   There was never a dull moment when Dan was there.

.. rst-class:: indented

As I was the eldest sister, the oldest sibling, and I had studied counselling, Dan respected my opinions on personal issues.    When Dan started to become ill, he confided in me.    Nick was always trying to support him in his depression but he was looking everywhere for help and had been to various alternative therapists to try to make himself feel better.   So, actually, it is me that said, "You've got to come -- we've got to sort this with one person, we have got to go to the right person, not just flounder around looking for help".

.. rst-class:: indented

Following a tick bite, he'd contracted Lyme disease and we never knew that was really what caused it all but, after that, he had been prescribed antibiotics for it and he starred to have terrible problems sleeping. He'd tried sleeping pills but it got worse and he became extremely anxious about the insomnia.

.. rst-class:: indented

He started to feel paranoid and this progressed into delusions.    These became so intense that he began to lose touch with reality.    I tried to reassure him but he became convinced that I and everyone else was trying to trick him.

.. rst-class:: indented

My brother had died on 17 August 2018 by hanging in the garage of my mother's house, within 48 hours after he had been discharged as an inpatient from The Lakes Hospital.    When Nick told me what had happened, I was hysterical with grief.     I couldn't breathe for sobbing. I was a passenger a car and a strange thing happened. In that moment, I thought I might get out of the car and walk into the traffic myself.     At Dan's funeral, the priest -- we've got a lovely -- I'm not particularly religious but we have a really lovely priest -- and he said that losing a sibling is visceral, it gets you in the gut.     He was our flesh and blood.   Our sister, Ruth, says it is as if we have been cursed.      We will never truly be happy again.

.. rst-class:: indented

Our happy family has been smashed.      There will always a bit of gloom in the corner of our eyes.      I find it incredibly painful to think about my brother. I cannot go to his grave.   There is a nightmare element to losing someone from suicide.   It will take me a long, long time to think happily about my dear, funny, delightful brother and that in itself is a curse.

.. rst-class:: indented

The worst thing, I think, is that he was abandoned with no warning and no advice was given to his unprepared family when he was still clearly ill.     This was obvious to his family at the time and clear from his medical records.   I heard recently from the nurse who had his paperwork, which I mentioned earlier, in front of her as she was reviewing the case on behalf of EPUT and she reasoned that everything was different now, that the hospital has different systems and the same mistakes would not happen again, and the nurse mentioned that Dan was given the right medication when he was being treated, and he so very clearly wasn't.

.. rst-class:: indented

This is a piece by his friend, Dickie, his best mate.   He was really horribly affected.   So it's Dickie's words:

.. rst-class:: indented

"Dan was my best friend.    He was my best man at my wedding and soon became arguably closer friends with my wife, such was his likability and unique ability to entertain as well as charm.    He was also an amazing godfather to my eldest son.    We met on the first day we both attended South Bank Polytechnic, when I say this good looking, suntanned lad sitting alone at the back of the theatre auditorium, wearing a bill puffer ski jacket.   He had a big quiff of a fringe that almost covered his face.

.. rst-class:: indented

"We immediately bonded and, from that point onwards, we ended up living together in numerous properties across London.   We travelled the world on numerous holidays from Cape Town to Barbados to Sydney, and we also played lots of sport together, albeit we were both very average across the board.   Whilst I would accept this fact, Dan was legendary at trying to do you science and technique into all past times, in the belief and hope it would make him better.   In truth, his sporting abilities were average, though he was very much world class in talking up his game.

.. rst-class:: indented

"If you were to ask anyone that knew him what his best trait was, they would all say that his ability to make people laugh and entertain was legendary.     He had a wicked sense of humour that only made sense when you knew him.   We once stayed in a holiday cottage in Suffolk that had a photo montage of hundreds of small photos, blended together hanging in the kitchen.      He knew that I was coming back a few months later to the same cottage with my parents so, unbeknownst to anyone, whilst we were staying, he took the glass off the frame, inserted a small cutdown photo of my dad, and stuck a small boy sitting on my dad's lap, all in the hope that when we visited a month later, my father, being the curious type, would browse the montage in this holiday cottage and spot himself.   I thought my dad was having a heart attack when I heard the roar months later when he spotted himself in amongst the hundreds of small photos that made up the montage.

.. rst-class:: indented

"Every parent, particularly mothers of his friends and girlfriends, loved Dan as he made people laugh.      He was legendary at dressing up for fancy dress parties, plus he loved to drop in unannounced when undertaking his many trips around the UK looking for development sites.    We played so much sport together and had so many extraordinarily happy times.    He tended to lose at most things he played, albeit was obsessive at getting better and just had great chat.

.. rst-class:: indented

"The last game of cricket and indeed the last over he ever bowled at Sheen Common was excruciating to experience as he suffered from the bowling equivalent of golfing yips.    I think it was 13, probably 14, balls before the umpire put him out of his misery and called 'over'.

.. rst-class:: indented

"I personally feel I let him down but not being with him the weekend he was released from hospital.    I was away with friends but I don't believe I was made aware of his release either until the day or possibly the time he was actually home.    I was a regular visitor whilst he was at hospital, when he often tried to convince me that he wasn't a danger to himself, given he was takes his drugs, which was not always the case, plus he would say he wasn't strong enough to self-harm, which was not the case.

.. rst-class:: indented

"He was genuinely a unique individual and, like Jane, my life has been much poorer since we lost him. I personally feel that the system failed him.    We will never get him back but apart from the many happy memories we shared, if his legacy can be to ensure that no one else will ever have to experience what his family and friends have had to unfairly endure, then that will be one tiny ray of light in is passing."

.. rst-class:: indented

Excuse me.

**Ms Lea**: Jane, thank you so much for that account, on behalf of both your family and Dan's best friend, Richard Railton.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Yes.    Thank you.

**Ms Lea**: Amanda, please can we have the photograph on the screen for a few moments?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Oh, yes, he was a bit skinnier in those days.

**Ms Lea**: Thank you Amanda, please take down the photograph.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Thank you.

**The Chair**: Can I thank you very much for those very moving

accounts --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Thank you.

**The Chair**: -- and also for your evidence, which we very

much appreciate.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Jane Maier**: Thank you very much.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Lea**: Jane, thank you, that concludes your evidence.

Chair, we will have a pause for a few moments while the

next witness takes to the witness box.

**The Chair**: Thank you. (Pause)

**Ms Troup**: Chair, I understand our next witness is on her

way up.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

Emma Cracknell
--------------

*EMMA CRACKNELL (affirmed).*

Questioned by Ms Troup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Troup**: Thank you.     First, could you give your name for

the record, please.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, it is Emma Cracknell.

**Ms Troup**: Thank you, Emma, you are the daughter of Susan Spring

who died on 1 February 2012 when she was 54 years old,

yes?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: That's correct.

**Ms Troup**: You have provided to us a witness statement, you should have a copy of that in front of you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: That witness statement is 15 pages long and, if you look, please, at page 15, the final page there, you gave a statement of truth and signed your witness statement and it's dated 11 June of this year.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, that's correct.

**Ms Troup**: Are you happy that your witness statement is accurate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, I am.

**Ms Troup**: That witness statement, as you know, will stand as your evidence, and I won't take you through it line by line in your evidence now.   You also, I want to note, provided a commemorative account about your mother and about the impact of her death on your family in our hearing in November of last year and we thank you for that evidence and for your evidence today.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Okay.

**Ms Troup**: The first you were aware that there were serious problems with your mother's mental health was when you received a call on 11 January 2012; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: That's correct, yes.

**Ms Troup**: That call, as I understand it, was from your mother's partner --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, it was.

**Ms Troup**: -- to say that she was in hospital and that she had

taken an overdose?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, that's all he told me at the time, yes.

**Ms Troup**: Now, your mother had a history of chronic pain and that

had been being managed with painkillers for some time?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, she had been suffering from lower back pain, so

.. rst-class:: indented

I just presumed that she had taken some of her

.. rst-class:: indented

painkillers and it had had a bad effect, yes.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   When you got to hospital, you quickly realised how

urgent it was?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: She had been admitted to A&E at Broomfield?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: Her wrists -- her arms were bandaged --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- and she was in a coma?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: Her partner told you that she had cut her wrists in the

bath and had taken a large overdose of various

medication?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, she was laying in the bath and had cut both of her

.. rst-class:: indented

wrists and, yes, she was being resuscitated in the

.. rst-class:: indented

ambulance and, yes, she was still in a coma when we got

.. rst-class:: indented

there, so ...

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   All of this was completely unexpected to you because, before that date, you had been unaware of any mental health problems?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No none whatsoever.   Nothing.

**Ms Troup**: I am looking, if you want to follow it but you don't need to, at page 2 of your witness statement and at paragraph 10.   You tell us a little there about the state that your mother was in when she came round.     You describe her as being a quivery wreck?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, so when she was in hospital, me and my partner rushed back to the house to see what medication she was on because -- and it was then I realised how much medication she had taken because there was boxes and boxes of tablets that she had taken and, when we got back to the hospital, she had come round and she was just saying how sorry she was and that she hadn't meant to do that and, you know, she didn't -- she kind -- I had a bit of red on my top, which was a heart, and she thought that was blood.   She was just all a bit of a panic.   She didn't really understand where she was and what she had done.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So ...

**Ms Troup**: She stayed at Broomfield until she was discharged on 17 January, so five days?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: What you tell us in your witness statement is that, in fact, during that time, she was on a general ward not a psychiatric ward --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: That's correct.

**Ms Troup**: -- and that she was awaiting a review by a plastic surgeon for the injuries to her wrists?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, that was the only reason that she had stayed in that long, was because she kept getting pushed back and pushed back because there was like a waiting list to see the surgeon for her wrists, yes.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So every time I would go in, it would say on the board "nil by mouth" because she was having to not have any food and to wait for -- just in case a space came available to get her wrists -- both of her wrists sewn back up.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   As a result, for quite a large part of those five days she wasn't eating?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.

**Ms Troup**: You also tell us that you consider that that was a very serious suicide attempt by your mother on 11 January.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, it was definitely a -- sadly it was an attempt to end her life, yes.   I have got no doubt about that. She -- you know, it was a very extreme way of doing things.    But as she was, you know, in the past -- worked in the police for the last 20 years, she sadly knew ways to do things.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So it was sadly -- now I think back, it was premeditated, it was all part of her plans, the way to do things.

**Ms Troup**: Yes, one of the other things that leads you to conclude it was planned and premeditated is that your mother was aware on that day that her partner would be out for many hours?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, he was going to be at golf, yes, for the majority of the day and -- yes.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: One of the things that you tell us is that a major concern, if not the major concern, for you is the fact that what your mother did on 11 January 2012 was noted down in her records as "self-harm", and that you feel very strongly that it wasn't taken seriously as a very extreme attempt to bring her life to an end?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No, throughout the whole assessment and the time in hospital and the time after, it was all deemed as self-harm, and it was not a suicide attempt.   It was never really spoken about like that but it was definitely -- you know, she wanted to end her life, yes, that is very -- by what she had done, what she had known, you know, in her professional life as well, it was the tablets that she took.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: You know, she was fully clothed when she got into the bath.    It was all very -- not in sound mind at all.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.    She had been a police officer for more than 20 years?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, she worked as a police officer and then she went back and worked in the Metropolitan Police after she had me, yes.

**Ms Troup**: One of the things you have discovered is that, when your mother arrived at A&E, on that day or the day after, she was asked if she wanted to be sectioned.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, so one of the things that we had obviously just general conversation with Mum afterwards was that they had said, you know, "Would you like to be sectioned?", and she had replied, with her partner present, no.

.. rst-class:: indented

But my argument and my strong feeling now is, you know, what do you have to do to be sectioned and that choice be taken away from you, where actually we need to wrap the care around you and say, "We know best at the moment.     You are not very well, and we can tell that by, you know, what you have -- what we have just witnessed and we need to look after you, so we will be sectioning you" --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- "and taking care of you for this time".

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: And, you know, it shouldn't be deemed as a bad thing, it should be deemed as, "Actually, we are, you know, going to take good care of you now and we are going to look after you in this way and we feel this is going to keep you safe", instead of, you know, being sectioned is such a bad thing and the delivery of that being an option.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: It should have been, you know, in this case, people that do this, you know, this is the outcome of those actions, you know.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Some choice needs to be taken away, just due to the fact that she was obviously unable to keep her -- she was not in sound mind from her actions and she needed to be looked after and, unless you are going to then do the carer's assessment, which wasn't completed, and make sure that care is foolproof at home, that could be carried out at home, then that needs to be looked into as a serious option to be sectioned.   I don't think it should be a negative thing.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   One of the things you now know from the records is that, during your mother's stay in a general ward at Broomfield, she had no assessment from a psychiatrist at any time?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.

**Ms Troup**: There was one assessment by a social worker --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- and we will come on to this but, at a much later stage, an independent psychiatrist produced a report about your mother's care and treatment during that period --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- for the purpose of a civil claim, I think --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: -- and concluded, amongst other things, which we will come onto, that the assessment that was carried out by an approved social worker, when your mother was at Broomfield, was wholly inadequate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm.    It was just -- it dawned on me, because of my profession now, I work in domestic abuse, that the carers -- the social worker saw my mum with her partner and I just deem that -- two-pronged, really.   That we don't know what goes on behind closed doors in anyone's relationship, I don't doubt that there was anything untowards.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: But, just in case, there was -- I think that that needs to be carried out on their own and also because you just try to protect the people that, you know, you love --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- so you don't want to say, "Actually, I don't want to be here any more" because how sad and hurtful is that to the person, you know, you are -- who loves you.   So I think, you know, it was, it needed to be completed, you know, as it is done with -- in maternity now, which is really good.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: It needed to be done on her own.

**Ms Troup**: I understand.   So two points there: your first that at no stage was your mother assessed without being in the presence of her partner --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: -- and it's your view that, in general terms, there should be at least one assessment or one discussion with a clinician that takes place with the patient alone --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: -- partly because, without any knowledge about the person's background, always having the partner present during those discussions or during an assessment could present a risk, if there were a background of coercion and control or domestic abuse, but also because -- and you do tell us this in other parts of your statement -- your mother was very good at minimising how bad she was feeling --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: -- and spent, as I understand it, when you did discuss it, quite some time saying, after 11 January 2012, that she was all right now and she didn't know why she did it and it was just a black out and she hadn't intended to end her life?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and she would have always said that to protect me from, yes, what was really happening, and it was only later when I requested her medical history that I did find out that she was actually on antidepressants at the time as well, before -- I think she just come off them but she had a previous history of being on antidepressants, which I never would have known.   But a parent doesn't always know those things about -- a child doesn't always know those things about a parent, do they?

**Ms Troup**: No.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So should have --

**Ms Troup**: Well, and as you say elsewhere in your statement, you and your mother had an appropriate mother-daughter relationship --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- and there are matters she might not want to have discussed with you?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No, I didn't know those things.

**Ms Troup**: Were you asked at any stage to give any input into what kind of person your mother was or what her triggers might have been or how she presented normally when she was not unwell?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: I wasn't spoken to at all.    And, actually, we say she was with her partner but I actually am her legal next of kin, so I was never ever asked a single thing about -- and it's just at the time, we were just all so -- because now, thinking back, I think maybe I should have been a bit more bolshy and I should have made my presence a bit more clear and said, "What is going on?" But at the time, we were just hoping that somebody was going to take us under their wing --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- and, you know, tell us all these things that were going to happen.   But I never got spoken to at all.

**Ms Troup**: Yes, one of the things -- one of the descriptions you give of that period in your witness statement is that you were all walk around like zombies?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, we were just on another planet.   Honestly, I just never thought it would happen to us because we had never had previously mental health issues in the past, I have never dealt with anybody with mental in the past, so that was all very new to me.    I just didn't really know what was going on.    I just knew that the person in front of me now was not my mum.

**Ms Troup**: Yes, you describe her after 11 January as being and presenting to you, who knew her well, as a very unwell person?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.   And that is, I think -- I am so pleased that I had that time at home with her after the first attempt because I saw how poorly she was because I just -- I saw that she was just a different person.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: She was really not very well and she was unable to make the smallest of decisions where she was -- obviously, in her role at work, as a professional, she was making decisions all the time about really important things, whereas, you know, she wouldn't even -- if she wanted lunch or not, she wasn't able really to process those sorts of decisions.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: She was really unwell, yes.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   One of the other things that you tell us is that, before your mother was discharged on 17 January, there was no communication with you.   She had, as I understand it, a very large and loving support network of friends and family who could have been drawn on for support --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: -- but were all as in the dark as you were about what to do --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- and what should be done.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and sadly people do try -- they do stay away unless they have been made to be involved, you know, people just think you're getting on with things but we really needed someone to bring us all together and say, "Look, you know, what can you -- how can you all help?"

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Because we didn't want her to be left alone for long periods of time.   You know, she wasn't very well, so if we had known and if everyone like come together to make a plan, you know, we could have had like a rota system.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: But we put all of our faith in the crisis team, to be there, to see her, to tell us what was going on, to say if she was getting better or not.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: We just didn't know.   We were just all completely in the dark with everything, really.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Just hoping that they were going to kind of fix her.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   So she was discharged to the care of a home

treatment team?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: You had very few details about that --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- or what that would involve?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, they were going to see her every day, is all

.. rst-class:: indented

I knew, not for how long.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Not when, at what time, not what they were going to do

.. rst-class:: indented

while they were there.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Nothing, just that they would be coming into see her.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   Whilst your mother was at Broomfield between

12 January and 17 January, she was not medicated in

terms of any psychiatric treatment or care?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.

**Ms Troup**: But, in fact, she was prescribed some antidepressants to

start after she left hospital --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- and you, in fact, went to the pharmacy with her to

pick up that prescription?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: You tell us that it had been your understanding that

many antidepressants take two weeks to start to work --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: -- and that, to you, it is very difficult to see why that treatment, if it was deemed necessary, was not started whilst he was she was on a general ward in hospital?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: I just don't understand and it was so stressful to be going with her to, you know, stand in line at a pharmacy and paying for this medication.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: I am not saying we shouldn't pay but just having that realisation that we needed this medication and it was just -- and what if she didn't want to take it, it was that she needed it and I remember thinking what if I wasn't here to bring her, she couldn't drive, her wrists were -- you know, she had just had surgery on both wrists.   What if that person wasn't able to drive to the pharmacy to get their medication.   It was all like why wasn't this given to her before why wasn't she being put on this and told take it like this, she was then having to read the instructions.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: And, you know, it was just -- no, there was no care. I just remember thinking, "I am so glad that I am here with you to be able to support you in taking this medication".

**The Chair**: Were you made aware of who saw her for a psychiatric assessment while she was in Broomfield?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: She saw one lady but it's documented somewhere, isn't it, the lady that she saw?

**The Chair**: But you didn't have any contact with them?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No, no.

**The Chair**: And they did not tell you specifically about the assessments that she had had for her mental health?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No, it was only my mum said that it was asked if she wanted to be sectioned and she said no.

**The Chair**: That was it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: That was it, yes, that was all I got told.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Troup**: Thank you.   One of the other major concerns that you raise is that it does not appear that any thought was given, before your mother was discharged, to what her home environment looked like and who would be there to take care of her.

You refer to it as a carer's assessment.   None was carried out?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.

**Ms Troup**: Separately from the point you have made about seeing a patient alone so that they can express themselves in full without fear of upsetting their families or their loved ones, I think, is this right, what you feel is

that it was entirely inappropriate to discharge someone

into the very environment they had just come from,

having made a very serious attempt on their life,

without locking at what that home environment was?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.   Yes, they just didn't even know what they were

.. rst-class:: indented

sending her back to.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: You know, she had just been found in a coma in a bath,

.. rst-class:: indented

fully clothed --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- and then they sent her back there five days later --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- to -- you know, to the same situation.    It was

.. rst-class:: indented

just -- with no conversation with any relatives, you

.. rst-class:: indented

know, she's got a sister and daughters, you know, like

.. rst-class:: indented

there's loads of people --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- you know.

**Ms Troup**: One of the things you tell us is that when you received

a call from your mother's partner to say that she was

being discharged, your first feeling was one of relief

because you assumed that she would have been screened

and she was safe to go home?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.   Yes.   Yes, we were obviously excited to have her

.. rst-class:: indented

home but we -- you know, we were believing everything that she was saying and that we were just hoping that the medical people there had made the assessment that she was obviously deemed fit enough to go home, which is obviously not true, in retrospect.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   In terms of the home visits that then took place, we know from the records that, during that period, your mother received visits from at least five different individuals --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: -- and the way that you describe those is that they were very ad hoc.   You never knew what time someone was going to come?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.   This was one of the saddest -- sad things as well because she was pinning a lot of her hopes on them and she was wanting to be there when they were going to arrive, but we never knew what time they were going to be there.   So I would say, you know, "Let's go to the garden centre and get a coffee or let's go for a walk and do things".

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: And she would say, "No, because we have got to wait, we don't know when they're going to be here".   So I did end up speaking to them saying, "Could you ring us half -- we will never be more than half an hour away from wherever, could you ring us half an hour and we'll come back because she wants these appointments with you, she's pinning -- you know, wants to see you", and that never happened either.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So we just didn't -- you know, she could come to us for Sunday roast -- for lunch, and whatever and we weren't able to do that because -- so there was no -- we weren't able to give her that recovery --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- you know, to see friends and family because she was sitting around waiting for these 20-minute, 15-minute sessions with these, like you say, different people that we have not seen before.

**Ms Troup**: When you called to discuss with them the difficulties it was causing, that you never knew when the visits were going to be, what response did you get; what were you told?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: They did say that they would do that, they would ring half an hour before.     They seemed like that was a reasonable request but they never did.

**Ms Troup**: But it didn't occur?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.

**Ms Troup**: One of the other things you tell us is that your mother was given a hard copy, a printed handout about anxiety?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: Tell us about that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So in one of the first or second sessions, I remember going there -- maybe later that day, and my mum showing me what she had received, and it was like the biggest -- it was a big about 20 pages of the poorest photocopied handouts that you could ever see about, yes, managing anxiety, managing depression, and it was just so big and if you know anything about, you know, depression, your concentration level is very low, she wasn't even able to read the book that she had got a bookmark in by her chair, so she was never going to sit there and read reams and reams -- and I just think that should have been done practically, with her in a really trauma-informed way and they could have make worked through it together.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Rather than, "Here, read this".    Even if it was a leaflet but, again, one size doesn't fit all with any of these things.   So I just think it was like a really -- again, it was just that realisation, "Oh, this is what I must have then, you know, I must have depression, anxiety" --

**Ms Troup**: Yes?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- "and those things".    It just wasn't a very nice way of receiving this information and it was just unusable, and when we had -- because we obviously had loads of complaint meetings afterwards, sadly, when we really weren't in the right frame of mind either, we were completely driven with grief, and we were having these meetings, we sat there and when I showed them what she had been handed they were -- said, you know, "No one should ever be handed that, you know", and they took it from me.

**Ms Troup**: Because of the size and quality of it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, both of those.   Yes.   They took it from me, they wouldn't -- they just said, "Can we please have this to show and to say this should never infer be handed out to anybody else".   So ...

**Ms Troup**: Yes, I understand.    I think either on discharge or on one of the home visits, your mother was also given a CD, maybe a meditation or something to play --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: -- and she accepted that --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: She didn't --

**Ms Troup**: -- but she didn't have anything to listen to that on?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No, but I think that again, just if you are in the profession and you are doing those assessments, you know, she was just people pleasing at that point.    You know, she was just taking -- "Give me a booklet, I can't read it, thank you; give me a CD, I can't play it", because that is -- that's how unwell she was.   She was just masking everything.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: You know, minimising everything, "Yes, of course I am well enough to listen to this on -- I don't have a sound system".   It's quite an old thing to give someone, really, now.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   One of the things you tell us, I think you said a few moments ago, is as far as you were aware, when there were home visits, those lasted for no more than 15 or 20 minutes?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, no.

**Ms Troup**: Those didn't seem to you to be assessments or sessions of any kind, they were almost like a check-in, is that a fair way to describe it.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, I would definitely -- one of the sessions she didn't even take her coat off, that was part of my complaint, as well, because she just came in, she made a very rude remark about my -- saw my mum's tablets, shook them at her, and said, "Oh, you'll be rattling on these", and she didn't even take her coat off and, after that, she stopped taking the tablets as well because it was -- you know, it was a very derogatory thing to say because we wanted her on those tablets.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: She should have been, if anything, promoting those tablets, after what we had all been through and to say that she would be rattling -- that's obviously a term, I have heard it before, a phrase that you do say when people are on medication but it is not a professional thing to say.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   Do you think, in your view, was it as a direct result of that possibly intended to be a flippant remark that your mother did stop taking some of the medication she had been prescribed?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, yes.

**Ms Troup**: I think you say that one of those was diazepam and then when she stopped taking it she had even more problems sleeping?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: She wasn't sleeping, yes.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and just not taking the coat, just means you are you not going to be around for long, it means you are not settling it, it wasn't going to be a cold house, it is a lovely -- it was a lovely home, so it just meant that you wasn't really going to be there for very long.

**Ms Troup**: Yes, one of the other things you tell us about in your witness statement but didn't know about at the time, is that there were a series of sort of -- I think they were qualified smart targets that were set for those who were coming to see your mother on home visits and, having seen them now, you consider that they were incredibly inappropriate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: One of those, I think, was a sort of goal to encourage your mother not to fear change and to see it as something positive and to try and manage her anxiety in that way?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: There were others that were very general and around determining if her mood was impacting her ability it function?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: Now, to you, I think -- and you must tell me if I am wrong -- it was very clear that your mother's mood was impacting her ability to function?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: What is it about these targets and this sort of, "Let's encourage her to understand that change is not necessarily negative", what is it about those that you consider to have been inappropriate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: It was just the reason that change needed to occur.    So I think the reason that they put that in as part of the target was because she was worried about going back to work --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- and even though she was then worried about the financial burden that that would then put on the family, so she -- they were saying, "Change is a good thing because you can get a new job and you can do new courses and things".    But she needed, like -- it was like they missed a stage, they had gone from one minute she is, you know, sadly dying in a bath, to next minute she needs to appreciate that change could be a good thing. Well, she is a very professional person, she didn't really need someone to tell her -- obviously, change can be a good thing; it can also be a very worrying thing.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: But she -- they kind of missed a care bit in her plan of, you know, getting her back to just of a sound mind.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: She wasn't able to really -- to -- you know, she wasn't able to make any decisions.    She just was -- she just wasn't in the normal frame of mind to be able to go, "Oh, yes, you are right, change is a good thing".   She wasn't --

**Ms Troup**: Yes?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- didn't -- yes, it was just an odd thing to put as a target, really.

**Ms Troup**: An odd thing.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: (Witness nodded)

**Ms Troup**: Is this fair, I think that, to you, it seemed particularly odd, and plays into what you have been telling us about, about what appears to have been, to you, a failure to recognise how serious your mother's attempt on her life was on the 11 January?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.   Yes, in our complaint, all they ever kept to referring to it as was "self-harm" and we had to keep bringing them back and saying "How bad -- I don't know what attempt you would see as a suicide attempt, if that wasn't one".   I wanted some clarification, well, what is a suicide attempt then --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- because that definitely was a suicide attempt, not a self-harm, and that's how it was treated.     It was being treated more like a panic attack, you know, that she had just -- you know, she had had a few moments, you know, but it was very serious what she had -- and premeditated as well.   I do believe it was premeditated that she got the tablets, she stored the tablets up to do it.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   I understand that there came a day when you were at home with your mother, when one of the staff who was visiting was having a short discussion with you in the kitchen and said, I think this was on 30 or 31 January, "This is our last visit.   We are done now, we are discharging her from the service"?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and I just said, "You can't", and the kitchen is like here and then there was a corridor and then there is the living room.   I just looked towards my mum and I was like, "She is not well, like you just" -- a person -- and I think that just goes back to the fact there was so many people going into that home.    No one could have ever saw the real person, they'd only ever seen her poorly, and then five people just assessing a poorly person, and again, she was masking it and minimising it all the time, taking the handout, taking the CD when she had no way of using things, and she was just minimising.   That's not my normal mum.   My normal mum is like, "Right, come on, we are doing this now right, this is it, you know, in charge".   And she was not in charge of anything.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: She was ...

**Ms Troup**: Did you say that to staff at the time --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- "This is not my mum"?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: That's not my mum.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.

**Ms Troup**: Then, as I understand it, the next day you were going out and you received a call from your mother and her partner and both of them were in, I think, what describe as a mess or a complete state?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.   They just -- my mum just rang me and they were just in -- she was just going over and over the same concerns, and I just kept saying all the time, "It's not for us to worry about now".     She was so worried about returning to work --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- and that she wasn't able to do that well and she wasn't, she could not have gone back to work, that would not have been very safe for anybody.

**Ms Troup**: No.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So she wasn't able to return to work and again the -- her -- the work -- her colleagues at work hadn't come and done an assessment yet.     So I was just saying "Wait for all these things to happen, you are thinking too far ahead, you don't need to worry about these things at the moment", and then sadly her partner was also kind of feeding into that concern.     Whereas I was trying to say, "Don't worry about that yet", he was also feeling a bit -- I think they just got themselves into a bit of a place where they were unsure about the future.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: And I put some things in place, so I then rang the

.. rst-class:: indented

crisis team and told them the situation, and I also

.. rst-class:: indented

spoke to my mum's sister who was head of the HR

.. rst-class:: indented

department, so I thought she could give some reassurance

.. rst-class:: indented

that the situation would be ironed out and it would all

.. rst-class:: indented

be okay.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: But, sadly, those -- both of those things didn't happen

.. rst-class:: indented

and ...

**Ms Troup**: So when you spoke to the crisis team, you explained that

your mother was in a state and needed to be seen and

what were you told, were you told that someone would

visit?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: That then didn't take place?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: That didn't take place, no.    Well, it might have been

.. rst-class:: indented

too late, if it was going to take place.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: I don't know.

**Ms Troup**: You learnt, I think, about your mother's death from

a phone call from her partner?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Well, he was -- he -- they rang me and said, "You need

.. rst-class:: indented

to come home", and the police and my mum's partner were

.. rst-class:: indented

at home and told my partner, and then I got home and he

.. rst-class:: indented

told me that, yes, she had died, yes.

**Ms Troup**: As far as you can remember, is this right, in the

aftermath of your mother's death, no one from any

organisation contacted you?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.

**The Chair**: And the crisis team had said they would come?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, they did.   Yes, they were going to come.   Yes.

**Ms Troup**: You, along with family members, began to make

complaints to various authorities from about mid-April

2012, so only two weeks after your mother had died?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.   Well, first month -- yes, she died 1 February.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So it was, yes, a month after.

**Ms Troup**: A little more than two weeks, I'm so sorry.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, no, that's okay.

**Ms Troup**: You did, as I understand it, have one meeting with the

Trust about your complaints?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: We wrote loads of letters and then we finally got to

.. rst-class:: indented

have a meeting with them.   Yes, two ladies had a meeting

.. rst-class:: indented

with us.

**Ms Troup**: Tell us about that meeting.    What can you remember about

it?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: They were -- I think they were just -- you know, they

.. rst-class:: indented

were obviously very sorry and they were -- and they were

.. rst-class:: indented

apologetic and they were embarrassed about the handout

.. rst-class:: indented

when I gave it back to them.   They were cross about that.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: They said obviously things would change and they took some of our recommendations on board, and I mean there was a bit of argumentation, like, about, you know, some of the things that -- I was obviously quite cross about some of the things, and they were -- they did say some of the things that they would put in place are the way it normally happens, the practice that normally goes on, that is it, they do see you ad hoc, come over to the house ad hoc like that, and that was the way -- and they were saying -- the excuse was that they have lots of people to cover, they have a big area to cover, so they can't give you a time and --

**Ms Troup**: Because they have got a big geographical area for staff to cover home visits over?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.    So they were saying things like that, really, that they couldn't say a time and they didn't know how many people this were going to have on their caseload and they were obviously short-staffed, so one person was covering a big area.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So things like that.    But --

**Ms Troup**: If we look, you don't need to look at it but so you know where I am, I am looking now at page 11 of your witness statement and that's paragraph 91.   There you have listed a number of the recommendations that came out of the Trust's report, all of which I think you agree with but would add to?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: The first is that a risk management plan should be in place if a person following an assessment remains on a medical ward in hospital?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.   I just think she should have been seen that last day, to just make sure, because she obviously saw the social worker, I think day two or day three.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: But I think the last meeting should be, you know, making sure she had the right medication and making sure she was obviously then fit enough to come home.    That wasn't done by a psychiatrist, that was just done, you know, by the medical ward staff, that she had obviously -- her scars -- her wrists had healed up enough for her to go home, nothing about her mental health.

**Ms Troup**: Yes, so in terms of her physical health, she met the criteria for discharge?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: But your point -- and I think that is one of the recommendations with which you agree -- is that there ought also have been an assessment of whether or not she met the criteria to be discharged safely in terms of her mental health --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- and that simply did not take place?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.

**Ms Troup**: Looking at (c) on page 11, the Trust's report also recommended that any risk assessment and management plan should follow a face-to-face meeting, and I understand, is this right, that you agree with that and think that it's probably obvious that that should be done face to face?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and those targets, I think they should be done maybe jointly as well, I think that was what, you know, they thought that she kneed to work on, those three smart targets but actually was that done with my mum? Is that what my mum wanted to work on?

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Was it just one of those exercises that needs to be completed, we need some targets to work towards?     Is it something that she also wanted.    I don't know, I wasn't in every session, so I don't know if that's something they came up together or ...

**Ms Troup**: Yes.    Then at (d), and this is about the ad hoc home visits that we have been discussing, the report recommended that the way in which staff were allocated for those home visits should be reviewed.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.   Not such a large caseload and not such a large area, yes.

**Ms Troup**: Because what that resulted in for your mother, as far as you saw it, was not only sporadic care and possibly inconsistent care but also it affected your ability as a family to do things with her that were ordinary -- have her in your home, take her out -- that would, in your view, have assisted her recovery?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and she would have been having to repeat herself as well because if she is meeting five different care assistants she would have been having to retell what had happened or perhaps, you know, reintroduce herself and re-say all these things again.   So the support session kind of always would be starting from the beginning, rather than building up on what you had already -- you know, that relationship you had already got together.

**Ms Troup**: Yes, rather than starting from zero each time?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Every time, yes.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   The next recommendation that you have set out is to do with this booklet that we have talked about and the recommendation was that that kind of information if it's provided to a patient should be concise and easy to use?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: I think it's your view, really, that -- and you must tell me if this is wrong -- it needs to be more individualised and that, perhaps for someone who was as seriously unwell as your mother was, there might be merit in reading that kind of information but perhaps that should be worked through with a member of staff or talked through with her; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, we just thought it would be nice it was done in a session, rather than -- like, "Can we look at this together"?

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Rather than it just be handed, it would have been nice, "Do you know what anxiety is?   Can we look -- does any of this fit your description?   You know, can we put any of these practical, you know, things in" -- grounding techniques, I don't know -- "things in place together, would any of these work for you?", rather than, you know, "Here".

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   Then this is your last point at paragraph 91, the Trust's report did recommend that patients -- it describes those as "service users" -- being home treated should be seen alone at least once during an episode of care --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: -- which I understand that you agree with?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, yes, for the points that I said before but you just don't want -- like when she went to the doctors, I said, "Would you like me to go in with you", and she said, "No", and I think there is -- you know, you just don't want to tell everything in front of people, do you, how you are really feeling?   I think you just need to be -- and I think that, even if that person really insists that person, I think you need to say, actually, "We'll just do this on our own", even if, you know, they come in at the end or something?

**Ms Troup**: Yes, so rather than saying every time, for example, to a woman, "Would you like your partner to come in with you", I think what you are talking about is having at least a stage of assessment or treatment where that option is not given --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and that's what happens in maternity now and I think that should be the same, really, because you just -- you just don't know, and you don't want to -- what happened already, she had already hurt us a lot and she knows -- she knew she hurt us a lot, so I think if making us disconnect from the next part of, you know, the care, I think she would have felt, you know, that was going to hurt as well.      So she wanted to kind of include us.   So I was there for the support sessions as well.    In hindsight that should have probably -- I'd not been.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: It should have been done as private.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.    Thank you.   You return then to the lack of any kind of investigation into your mother's home environment or a failure to carry out a carer assessment, and one of the points you make is that really someone ought to have been looking at whether her partner and/or you were in a frame of mind to be able to give her the care that she required so soon after the events of the 11 January?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: I was so upset to see when I was looking on their website that, actually, one of the things they say a carer's assessment and never -- we were never asked, you know, anything.    We never completed this care assessment that they say, which I think is a really good idea, and they never did that.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Because people's past -- you just don't know what goes on, people's traumas in their past, there might be a history of suicide in people's pasts.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: They might be -- or mental health.     You just don't know if people are able to cope with those things.

**Ms Troup**: Yes, mentally and physically able to care for someone?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and financially, and the home, just loads of things that need to be taken into consideration before you put a person -- you know, a sick person back into people's care.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.    Going over the page on to page 12, you were asked in the Rule 9 request from the Inquiry about other complaints or investigations by organisations external to the Trust, so not the Trust, and what you say is that in a cycle of grief you get so angry, and so many people let you down.

As I understand it, one of your considerations is that you have told us that you wrote a lot of letters and there were meetings and I understand that you were very active in trying to find out why things had unfolded in the way that they have done?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: But I think one of the points you make is that this is an enormous burden to place on a grieving family?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.   It was literally the last thing we wanted to do, but I just knew it wasn't right.

.. rst-class:: indented

I just -- I just couldn't let it go because I just kept saying, and me and my dad were writing letter after letter, and a replying letter again.   Then we finally got that meeting.

.. rst-class:: indented

But I just knew that -- and it was the last thing I wanted to do.    I was having to do everything because I was, you know, her only daughter.     So I was doing all the dealing with the solicitors and everything and lots of other things.    I was having to close bank accounts, sell her house, all the other things that I was having to do, but I just knew that we had to put this complaint in because the service that we received.

.. rst-class:: indented

We had pinned all our hope on the crisis team.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: We just wanted them to take us and say this, you know, "We deal with families in situations like this.    This is what we do.   We tailor it to you.    You know, we're going to provide this care.    We are going to do these plans, action plans".     You know, "This is what's going to happen.   This is what the care is going to look like. We'll be in every, you know, every day between these" -- even if she said between the afternoon.

**Ms Troup**: Yes, just a window of time.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, the morning to play with.    And, you know, "And this is what it's going to look like.     It's going to be for two weeks and we're going to reassess it on the eighth week, and we are, you know, until the medication" -- none of that happened.

**Ms Troup**: No.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Not one conversation.   I just couldn't believe it because we just -- we'd pinned all our -- this was our last hope --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- that someone was going to ...

.. rst-class:: indented

I truly believed that she wouldn't do it again.   But that was because that's what she was telling me.     I was her daughter.   But they are professionals.    They needed to look deeper.   Like what she'd -- the first incident what she had done, they really needed to take so seriously and say, "How did that occur because now she's telling us she is okay?"

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: But how did it get to this point that she wasn't okay?

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: And none -- no -- yes, she's saying that to me, but I was just, you know, grateful that she was still alive.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So I was only thinking about that.     Like a selfish point of view: she is still here.      But I was never thinking about digging any deeper.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: But then obviously two weeks later she -- you know, she died.    So, obviously, she wasn't okay but they needed to have supported us and helped us within that time. I just ...

**Ms Troup**: And gone further than --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Popped in for 15 minutes every day.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   I understand that at some stage your mother had been offered CBT or cognitive behavioural therapy?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: But for reasons you are unaware of that just never came about, it was never followed up?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.    She was looking forward to that.   She did say that she would be open to do that.    So we were kind of saying -- you know, I looked into it myself and said, "Oh, no, that looks good.    Maybe you should do that", and, you know, she was booked to have it on the Thursday.    It just never happened.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No one ever came to do that.

**Ms Troup**: We have touched on this already, but for the purposes of a civil claim an independent psychiatrist looked at all of the records and reviewed the care and treatment that your mother had received, and I understand from your witness statement that you agree with his conclusions?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: I am summarising very generally, but he concluded essentially that her care and treatment was wholly deficient; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, yes, he did.   Yes.

**Ms Troup**: He tells us that whilst your mother was in Broomfield Hospital, despite regular requests from the medical team who were treating her on the general ward for her physical injuries, she was not assessed at any time by a psychiatrist, we know that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: We also know from the records that after your mother's discharge when she was at home, I think the day after her discharge, on 18 January, she was seen by a doctor at home, but the independent psychiatrist again finds that that assessment was inadequate in terms of taking a full or comprehensive psychiatric history from her?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: Then linked to two of the points that you have been making, it appears to this psychiatrist from the records that no proper consideration appears to have been given during your mother's stay at Broomfield as to whether or not she might have benefited from psychiatrist inpatient treatment.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: Her actions on 11 January are described by that psychiatrist as extreme, and I think -- a point that resonates with all that you have been saying -- that the conclusion is that the extremity of those actions or the severity of that attempt was not really recognised at any stage?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: No.    They just -- they kept calling it "self-harm".    It was not -- it was not taken seriously, no.    I agree with that.

**Ms Troup**: Then one of that psychiatrist's other conclusions is around a lack of consistency in her care --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: -- which we have already touched on.

In terms of the events, unless there is anything else that you think I have missed or that you would like to highlight, I want to take you please to the recommendations you have made and those are at page 13, so the last two or three pages of your witness statement.    These matters that you have listed I think, Emma, are a mixture of the matters that you consider to have been the most serious failings in your mother's care alongside recommendations of what you think should be happening?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: Many of these we'll already have covered but I want to give you the opportunity to make further comment or tell us anything that you think I might have missed.

The first at paragraph 104(a) is around the decision to simply say to your mother, "Would like to be sectioned?" and to take her "No" at face value and discharge her?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.   And, again, that was done in front of her partner as well.     So I think they probably just wanted to get home --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- to try and salvage or make sense of what had happened rather than actually thinking about what she needed at that time.    And, like I said at the start, it's just deemed as quite a negative thing --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- rather than actually it's quite a positive thing to take you in and be looked after for a long period -- again, however long she needed.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   Your second point at (b) is about a care assessment for the whole family to look at what the worries were, what the home environment was and who was there and able to support her?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: Your third point is about the fact that the anti-depressant medication she was prescribed wasn't prescribed until discharge.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: So the five days during which she was on a general ward were sort of empty days in terms of psychiatric treatment or care?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.   There was -- yes, she didn't have any medication during that time.

**Ms Troup**: Your fourth is about a support plan or a package just to give families and those supporting patient events who are discharged home an idea of what the framework is --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: -- and what it can look like and what help and support is available?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.   Yes, just outline what the care usually will entail and then, you know, tailor it to our family, you know, what our family looks like and how that would fit in with us as well as fitting in with them.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   I think, if I were to summarise it, that a great deal of the points you make are around not being provided with generic one-size-fits-all care but actually taking account of the individual --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mmm.

**Ms Troup**: -- and their individual circumstances and their individual family circumstances?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: The next point you make at (e) is about the CBT that was offered but never happened, and we don't know why.   The point you make here is that families pin hope on that kind of offer?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: Your mother would have accepted that help?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: She wanted the help --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Mm-hm.

**Ms Troup**: -- and it just --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: It wasn't provided, yes.    But is that something that should also be part of something we talk about at the beginning, you know, "This is going to happen on day six, this is" -- you know, part of that assessment should be, you know, "We're going to see how you are at home but on day six you will be getting a proper counselling service or you'll be getting CBT you'll be getting other therapies that are more tailored.    Yes, that's what happens".

.. rst-class:: indented

You know that's -- not just something out of the blue, "Or we could offer you this.   Would you accept it?"

.. rst-class:: indented

"Oh, yes, it'll be happening", and it didn't.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: It's just like an afterthought, you know, rather than part of the process.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   Then at the bottom of page 13 you refer back to this conversation you had that day with a member of

staff at your mother's home in the kitchen where it was,

you know, suddenly sprung upon you that she was going to

be discharged from that home treatment service and

I think, is this right, it's your feeling that when

a decision like that is taken, that should be something

that involves the whole of the support network?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and do you then get seen by a psychiatrist?   Do

.. rst-class:: indented

they make that decision?    Who is making that decision --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- at the end?   And what is the, you know -- what is the

.. rst-class:: indented

guidance, the barometer sort of thing.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: You know, has she got to like number 10 now on wellness?

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: What is the --

**Ms Troup**: What progress has been made?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: I think, if we go over the page, one of the matters you

mention again here which is important to you is that the

fact that your mother minimised her symptoms or

minimised how bad she was feeling and masked that to

an extent -- I am looking at paragraph (i) on page 14 --

that she presented to those staff who did come to see

her at home smiling and saying, "Okay, I'm okay", and

I think this goes back, does it, to your point about

expecting professionals to be able to look deeper?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes, and asking the family what normal is to my mum --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- because that did present as a normal person.   But

.. rst-class:: indented

that's not what I would've considered my mum to be

.. rst-class:: indented

normal.   But they didn't know that, they were seeing

.. rst-class:: indented

a stranger.   They needed some background, you know,

.. rst-class:: indented

"What's she normally like?"

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Because she hadn't got back to that person yet.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.   You make the point at paragraph (j) on the same

page that whilst you recognise that there is a problem

with resourcing or funding, a crisis team is

an emergency service and it needs to be good?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Like I said, we were just pinning all our hopes on

.. rst-class:: indented

them --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- and we just couldn't believe what the service was

.. rst-class:: indented

like, that it was so ad hoc and there just was no --

.. rst-class:: indented

like I say, like a framework would be really helpful or

.. rst-class:: indented

a plan, something to expect, you know, "This is what we

.. rst-class:: indented

do in this situation".

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: There was none of that.

**Ms Troup**: You refer back, too, to what you saw of a home visit by a member of staff who didn't even take their coat off and what that indicated to you about the level of care that was being offered?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.    Just it -- and times, how long the sessions are going to be and what they're going to be completing in that.    So I mean, if it was just going to be a chat then that's obviously fine, but how long is that going to be for?    And then, you know, to look like you are staying for a little while --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- rather than just nipping in, in your coat, and going again.   So ...

**Ms Troup**: Yes.    You go on at paragraph (m) to say that, in terms of what we have talked about, about your mother masking and wanting to protect you and others and saying that she was okay, what professionals should have had in your view uppermost in their minds were the very serious injuries she had caused herself only five days previously?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.

**Ms Troup**: I think, is this fair, it seems to you as though that had almost sort of disappeared from everyone's minds in terms of the home treatment that she received?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Yes.    It just seemed to be forgotten and it was just -- they were obviously taking my mum's word for it.    But if they kept remembering actually what she had just done --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: -- and acted on that rather than -- you know, actions speak louder than words, kind of phrase.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: But keeping that at your fore mind that, you know, she'd just not wanted to be here five days ago --

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: So, why?   She's saying she is okay now but why didn't she feel like that five days ago?

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

Emma, I think, unless there are any other particular matters that you would like to raise, I think that will conclude your evidence.   In a moment before you leave the witness box I am going to ask that the photograph of your mother that you have provided be put up.

Is there anything else that you would like to say?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: I just wanted to say thank you so much for -- for going through this with us because I -- we really felt like we were on our own.   And we were on a bit of a rampage, you know, after she died and we felt like we were writing letters after letters and I just -- we were getting nowhere.   And I just knew that there was something wrong.   It just wasn't -- I just didn't feel like it was right.

.. rst-class:: indented

You really do pin -- I never thought I would be in this situation.    Like I say, my mum never suffered with mental health.    It did just come out of the blue.   We had such a lovely family set up.    So it just honestly can happen to anybody and I just -- and you never know when you need these services, and when you come into these services and it was like that I was honestly so shocked, and that's why we did write loads of letters.

.. rst-class:: indented

I just wanted it to be better.   I know it can be better.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: And I know they're small things, but they mean so much to families.     When you come into them, you want someone to wrap you up and just take control and look after you all and steer the way.    You don't want -- like, it's nice to have choices and things to be asked of you, but there also needs to be some leadership and someone to take control because you are not thinking straight.

**Ms Troup**: No.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: You're all like zombies and, actually, someone coming in, taking you by your hand saying, "This is what we normally do", is really helpful.

.. rst-class:: indented

So I just think for future it really needs people to take -- that know, you know, the situations that families are in and take some charge.

.. rst-class:: indented

And, you know, to be asked, "Do you want to be sectioned," you know, it's a good thing; to go in, to be going and have that care for a longer period of time, the way you sell it, you know, to a family.

**Ms Troup**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: You know, it's -- and it would -- it could save lives.

.. rst-class:: indented

I don't know, and I will never know, if any of these things would have changed the outcome, but the saddest thing is I will never know and, if all of those things had been done and I could walk away now and say, "Everything was done, it was perfect, the care she received was amazing", and this still happened, I would be able to be fine.    But because I am left sitting here going, "What if she had the CBT?    What if she had more support?     What if she had been sectioned?   What if she had started her medication in hospital?", you know, "What if she had been seen by a psychiatrist?"

.. rst-class:: indented

I'm left with so many unanswered questions that, you know, that's where the frustration and the sadness, you know, of the service came from and we just -- you know, we just wanted there to be answers, you know, to have some answers why this was like this and can it be different.    That's what we're hoping for.

**Ms Troup**: Thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Thank you.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed for your evidence.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Thank you.

**The Chair**: Please be assured that we will take on board

what you have had to tell us.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Emma Cracknell**: Thank you.    Thank you very much.   Thank you for your

.. rst-class:: indented

time.

**Ms Troup**: Could we have the photo, please.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Troup**: Thank you.

Chair, I understand, I am being advised, as long as

you are content, that if we could if we can break now

for lunch and come back at 2.00, so a slightly longer

lunch.

**The Chair**: Perfect, 2 o'clock.

*(12.50 pm)*

*(The short adjournment)*

*(2.05 pm)*

**The Chair**: Ms Pucks.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you, Chair, we are ready for the evidence

of Catherine Peck.

Please could I ask Mrs Peck to affirm as per the

card that should be in front of her.

Catherine Peck
--------------

*CATHERINE PECK (affirmed).*

Questioned by Ms Pucks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Ms Pucks**: Please could you state your full name for the

record?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Catherine Edna Lilian Peck.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.   You are the sister of Richard Harland

Elliott, who was born on 1 December 1953 and died on

24 May 2002, whilst an inpatient on Peter Bruff Ward at

Clacton hospital; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's correct.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.   By way of background, is it right that the

Inquiry sent you what we term a Rule 9 request

requesting your evidence?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, they did.

**Ms Pucks**: In response to that request, you provided a witness

statement to this Inquiry?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Do you have a copy of that in front of you?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I do.

**Ms Pucks**: Is it right that at the top is your name, Catherine

Peck?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: On the last page, on page 40, it is redacted but it is

your signature; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, that would be.

**Ms Pucks**: It is dated 5 June 2025?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Could I just confirm that you have recently reviewed the statement and can confirm that it is accurate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, I have.

**Ms Pucks**: Is it right that you would like this statement to be considered as your evidence to the Inquiry?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, please.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.   Now, I will be asking you some questions about this witness statement I will not be taking you through it line by line, but you can be assured that the Chair and the Inquiry team have considered it very carefully and will consider everything you say in that statement.

I would also like to acknowledge that you did provide commemorative evidence to the Inquiry last year and I would just like to state that we are very grateful to you indeed for your assistance with the Inquiry, thank you.

Just as a reminder, I will not be asking you to refer to any names of staff members in line with the restriction order that was imposed.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: (Witness nodded)

**Ms Pucks**: We will be structuring your evidence today in three parts: first, we will go through a timeline of your brother's involvement with the mental health services; second, I will ask you some questions about your concerns about his care, treatment and how you as his sister were dealt with by the Trust; and third and finally, I will ask you some questions about your recommendations to the Chair in light of your experiences.

Now, with that, if I could start with the first topic, which is a timeline of your brother's involvement with the services.   Your brother was born on 1 December 1953.   Is it right that his mental health difficulties began in the 1980s when he was in Canada?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's correct, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: You believe that he was first diagnosed with schizophrenia; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: In Canada, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: And when he returned to the UK, still in the 1980s, he continued to have episodes of severe mental illness?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Is it right that he had at least six hospital admissions between 1985 and 1995 in the UK and you have summarised these in your witness statement, and I will not go through that in any detail, but is it right that these hospital admissions included admissions to The Lakes mental health centre in Severalls Hospital, as well as Peter Bruff Ward in Clacton Hospital where he died; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: In between these admissions, to begin with, is it right that Richard found it difficult to cope independently and so he lived with your parents?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Initially, yes, when he came back from Canada.

**Ms Pucks**: But his condition did improve and he did, in fact, return to work on and off during that period of time yes?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Then in the 1990s, he moved into his own flat independently and in June 1999, the year before the relevant period starts, Richard moved to a flat in Dovercourt, where he moved from a one-bedroom flat to a two-bedroom flat; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: His records show that he did this because he was able to get better value for money but also in order to place some distance between himself and his family because he felt that his parents sometimes overreacted in relation to his health and he wanted to have greater control about his care and treatment; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I think that's the history, yes, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.   But from your perspective, you continued to speak to him on the phone and you continued to see him about once a fortnight during that period; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: About that, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Now, from 2000 until 2002, your brother had five admissions prior to his last admission.   There was an admission on 25 July at Peter Bruff Ward in Clacton hospital; on 6 September; on 27 February; and then again on 8 August, the following year, in 2001 to Severalls Hospital; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: It is, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: You have provided the details in your statement, I am just summarising them now, but does that sound like a overview?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That sounds right I didn't make a notes of the dates or anything at the time but that sounds right.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.    Now, in terms of requests for mental health assessments and how these took place, is it fair to -- if I may try to summarise it and you can tell me if I have got it right: Richard was primarily assessed further to requests from your parents, from doctors or the police; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: These assessments were usually undertaken in an emergency or a crisis situation rather than as part of a treatment plan, if I could put it that way?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Always, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: They were often associated with his refusal to take his antipsychotic medication; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, that is, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: He would become very unwell very quickly and he would not recognise how unwell he was in those moments; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's right.

**Ms Pucks**: There were occasions, you set out in your statement, where there was some delays in him getting assessed and your parents would have to stall him.   You refer to one example where your mum had to stay awake for two nights to keep him safe; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's right, she stayed with him in his flat to keep him safe.

**Ms Pucks**: So did she go to his flat where he was living independently?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's right, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: But at other times, is it right that he did go to the hospital voluntarily, whilst -- apologies, if I could start that again.

Sometimes he went to the hospital voluntarily but at other times he would have to be sectioned; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Would it be fair to say that there was no process for Richard when his health deteriorated, other than to call emergency or crisis services so that he could be given medication in a safe environment?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.   I didn't know any other means of getting help for him until he was in crisis.

**Ms Pucks**: Now, as far as his engagement with the mental health services is concerned, would it be fair to summarise it as follows: by 2000, Richard had developed a distrust of the mental health services generally?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I -- that was my feeling.   Yes, that's correct.   Various things, various -- for various reasons.

**Ms Pucks**: It might be that he will go into those when we discuss your concerns.    Is it right that he had -- I have taken this from his statement, so please do let me know if this is not right, but he had no confidence in the service's ability to properly care for or to protect him?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's correct.

**Ms Pucks**: He thought that health professionals wanted to control his illness with high doses of medication, with the use of restraints, sometimes lengthy admissions but no treatment of the underlying cause?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's correct, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Is it right that he was an active member of various organisations that advocated for change within the mental health world?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Now, as far as his diagnoses are concerned, you set out

at paragraph 17 in your statement -- I am not going to

take you through it unless it would assist you -- that

his EPUT mental health notes record a diagnosis of

schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder, paranoid

personality disorder and acute and transient psychotic

disorders?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Does that sound right to you?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: It changed, yes.   It seemed to change.

**Ms Pucks**: Did it change over the years?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Well, yes because he came back from Canada -- the only

.. rst-class:: indented

diagnosis we knew about was schizophrenia, and I am not

.. rst-class:: indented

sure how they found out or whether that was what was

.. rst-class:: indented

given to my parents.   But he was soon diagnosed as manic

.. rst-class:: indented

depressive, which is -- it can be bipolar as well.

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: So his diagnosis changed when he came to the United

Kingdom; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Now, still within the timeline, I want to move to his

last admission, 23 May 2002, and after this we will move

on to your concerns, if that's all right.   Is it right that you have been able to put together an understanding of what happened in the days before 23 May admission because, although EPUT destroyed his inpatient records in line with their retention policy, they retained the community mental health records; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That, yes, that is what I have been given.

**Ms Pucks**: You have the Community Mental Health records but not the inpatient records?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Correct.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.   Before 23 May, in fact on 21 May, so two days prior, both your mother and Richard's girlfriend had made contact with relevant services to inform them that they were concerned about Richard; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's correct, that's in the notes but that's 25 years ago and I have forgotten if I ever knew that that took place --

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: -- two days before he was contacted by the services.

**Ms Pucks**: It may be that this comes from the notes as well or you remember, but is it right that he was, in fact, seen at the Mayfield day service, two days prior to his admission but it was felt that there were no major concerns about him?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, that's right.

**Ms Pucks**: Following your family raising concerns, do you know if

they ever received a response in relation to

an assessment that has taken place or any plan of action

in relation to your brother?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Are you talking about the 23rd/24th?

**Ms Pucks**: The 21st, so after the concerns raised on the 21st?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No, I don't think so.

**Ms Pucks**: You don't believe they received any --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No, because they hadn't heard anything, that's why they

.. rst-class:: indented

eventually went two days later to his flat.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: His partner raised concerns and Mum and Dad drove with

.. rst-class:: indented

her so ...

**Ms Pucks**: So Richard's girlfriend contacted your parents and

together, is it right that they attended Richard's flat?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: They hadn't heard anything.

**Ms Pucks**: They hadn't heard anything so they attended the flat.

When they arrived, is it right they saw a number of

people outside of the flat?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, apparently lots of policemen.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes, is it right that you understand this to have been

the rapid response team which included a number of

police officers, Richard's psychiatrist, a GP and

a social worker?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I believe, yes, that's correct.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes, and we may go into this in a bit more detail later but is it right that you feel the large number of police officers involved and the large group of people that was generally there outside of his flat appeared to you to be heavy handed and frightening and inappropriate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I feel that and I know that my mother felt that.    She was very traumatised and she phoned me later on quite bewildered by the whole thing and by -- well, feeling for her son really, I suppose, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Is it right that at that time Richard was encountered and seen to be paranoid, making threats and accusing his GP of having burgled him?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, I am not sure if Mum was there at the time.

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: She came later.   But apparently this is according to the notes what happened, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes, and he was detained under Section 3 but your mother tried to reason with him and persuaded him to go in quite calmly, you said, in your statement?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, because he feared being restrained, that he thought he would be harmed because the restraint was very painful, it was violent and painful, and he had previously had a bad experience he felt that he would be harmed, if not die, to be honest, and he had told Mum and myself, and I don't know who else, but Mum was certainly aware of his fear, and so she persuaded him that, if he went in calmly and peacefully, that he wouldn't be put in restraints and so he complied.

**Ms Pucks**: He was taken to Clacton Hospital; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Clacton, Peter Bruff.

**Ms Pucks**: We may cover this in a bit more detail in a moment but is it right that he arrived at the hospital in the evening at around 6.00 pm, and that the inquest evidence that is available suggests that within about 15 minutes a decision was made to administer Richard with two different antipsychotic medications as well as a lorazepam, another injection as well?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's correct.   Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: In a statement drafted for the purpose of the inquest, which you have set out in your witness statement, it was described that Richard laid down on a mattress on the floor of his own free will and a member of staff injected him three times and, whilst he was incoherent, he remained calm; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: He was then left face down on the mattress alone in the room?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: We will go into detail of where he was placed and under what conditions but is it right that, having been -- apologies, is it right that at 5.20 am the following morning, staff noticed his breathing had quietened and entered to find his pulse faint and his lips blue?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: And emergency resuscitation efforts were initiated but Richard passed away shortly thereafter; is that right?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: (Witness nodded)

**Ms Pucks**: Now an inquest was held and the coroner concluded that your brother died of natural causes.   We understand that that is a conclusion that you simply cannot accept, given your concerns about what happened on that evening and I will ask you a few questions about the inquest in a moment.

Thank you for that, and for going through that timeline which hopefully will set some context to the concerns that you raise.

Now, the first question -- the first concern that I would like to raise with you is what Richard has termed the "mental health revolving door".    Now you state in your statement, at various parts of your statement, that Richard had become quite disheartened following every hospitalisation.   You use phrases like, "he became increasingly depressed about his circumstances", "he found it harder to be independent", "he found it harder to feel like a valued member of society", and medical records from September 2001 record helpful saying that "he was resigned to the mental health revolving door that he now found himself in, one of discharge becoming ill and readmission".

To your knowledge, was his own view of his health ever taken into account by his care team?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I can only think he must have told them about the effects that the medication was having on him.    They always seemed to give him quite strong doses of medication and that either meant he was putting on weight or affecting his sleep, or he was sleeping too much.   It was very hard to function.   I know right at the beginning, and you will probably come back to this, but we tried to find out what other care he could get from the services but we were just told that there was nothing he would be treated by medication, so that was his only alternative, I think.   It doesn't answer your question, sorry.

**Ms Pucks**: No, it did.   It did answer my question, thank you.

When you say other treatment, or other care, I think it is that you said, was there anything specific that you had in mind?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Well, we expected -- because he had gone through a lot of trauma in Canada, we could see why he had this initial -- I call it a breakdown, which I felt it was at the time, and we hoped that they would be able to give him -- talk to him about it, Talking Therapies, and give him some coping strategies, some kind of care plan, where he's on medication but they review you, they would perhaps tailor it, or something like that.    But he had just come out with heavy medication as his only option.

**Ms Pucks**: To your knowledge, was there a treatment plan that was aimed at breaking the cycle of readmission?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Not in the first 20 years of his illness, I would say, or -- sorry, not in the first more than 20 years -- probably about 10, 12 years, this was the cycle that he was in.

.. rst-class:: indented

I do not know when he moved to Dovercourt whether he was under another team that might have helped him.    He certainly accessed more day centres and more bodies of people that could -- perhaps he could talk to, that he could help and they could help him but, in the early days, there was nothing, nothing.

**Ms Pucks**: You state at paragraph 26 of your statement:

"To my knowledge, the only procedure recommended to our family when Richard's mental health appeared to be deteriorating was to call the emergency or crisis services for help, so that medication could be given in a safe environment in a secure hospital."

I note in particular, the use of the word "when", when Richard's mental health appeared to be deteriorating; did it feel as though the treatment plan treated this as an inevitability, that he would inevitably get worse and another call would have to be made or did you feel as though the treatment plan really saw a way out of that cycle?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: A hard one to answer.   I mean, initially, we hoped that it would be one episode one breakdown, and that he would get better.    That's what everybody hopes, isn't it?

.. rst-class:: indented

But we just saw that this cycle appearing in his life where he would have to reach a crisis point and then we would have to take him to the hospital.   There was no one else to turn to that could come along and talk to them, that could give him any help, any -- sorry, I can't think.

**Ms Pucks**: No.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: But, yes.    So that's the treatment initially, that's the only way we knew to get him help.    So each time we would hope that was the last time.    But, unfortunately, very early in his care, he was very heavily sedated.   He was put on depot injections, which meant that that lasted from one injection to another, and he couldn't -- he was just sleeping, eating and going to work.

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: That's what he was doing, and there was no way out for him to do -- except to stop his medication, which is what he did, and then of course he got ill again, eventually --

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: -- and he went through that cycle all over again.

**Ms Pucks**: Right.   Thank you.   I would like to ask you about your family's involvement as well in his care and in his treatment.   Now, you have stated in your statement that, if I have understood it correctly, that you do not consider that you or your family were really listened to when you attempted to provide your views about his care and his treatment.    Did you know what processes you could follow in order to raise any sort of formal complaints or concerns?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No.

**Ms Pucks**: No?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No, we had no knowledge of anyone undergoing a breakdown.    We weren't shown or pointed to any access to anything, really, that would help us.

**Ms Pucks**: Were you able to raise concerns in an informal capacity to anybody involved in his care?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I think my mother spoke to his GP --

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: -- about it.    But, again, there wasn't anything forthcoming apart from "Take the medication" --

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: -- "as it's prescribed and then he won't get ill", or that was the thought.    But Richard felt that he couldn't perform, he couldn't tell a joke, he couldn't join in a conversation.    He shuffled when he walked, he was dumbed down if you like.    He was quite a bright person, he had a good sense of humour.    He would have liked to interact with people more but he found he couldn't, and so that that option wasn't one he wanted to entertain, and he thought that perhaps he wouldn't get ill again, perhaps he would be able to show that he can cope.

.. rst-class:: indented

So that's -- you know, the alternative was always "Take the medication".

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: And yes, we weren't listened to.

.. rst-class:: indented

In fact, we were told by the doctor after the first real breakdown that he had that they didn't do talking therapies, they didn't that, it was treated by medication and we had to accept that.

**The Chair**: What would you have liked them to hear you say? What was it that you felt they weren't appreciating enough?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Well, Richard had -- Richard was the oldest of the boys, his brothers, and he, I think, took that role quite seriously.   So he thought that he would be the first to get married, the first to buy a home, the first to have children, et cetera, and that was important to him, to be a success.

.. rst-class:: indented

He went to Canada hoping for a new life but, unfortunately, he was divorced there, he lost all his money because they sold the house in England -- he lost all his money, his precious dogs that he had taken over there for company and everything.    In the end, he couldn't afford to keep them, so he had to find a new home for them, and he just lost -- I think he felt he lost respect, really.   Whether that was just his view.

.. rst-class:: indented

So, to me, he went through a lot of trauma.    He was sofa surfing, he was he didn't have a home to go to and, eventually, he was dispatched back to England to start all over again.   Now, that must be traumatic for anybody and nowadays, maybe you could access counselling but it didn't appear to be what was accessible then.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.   If I could turn to the period 21 to 24 May because I understand your biggest concern is the manner in which he was treated in the days and hours before his passing.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Now, I want to first ask you about delay.   You express concern about the delayed response from the mental health services to your parents and to Richard's girlfriend because they both, as we have already discussed, raised concerns two days prior on 21 May but he was not admitted until the 23rd.

Now, you state, and you stated to us in evidence today, that there is no record and you have no recollection of there being any response to your family raising concerns over his deterioration and, for an acutely unwell individual, a delay of two days can be quite critical, is what you say in your statement.       Now, this may seem like a question with an obvious answer but what is your concern about that delay?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Because you didn't seem to be able to access the service that would come in and be able to help Richard.     It appeared that he had to reach that critical point where he was sectioned every time, and that certainly was the case on this occasion.   They had warning two days before and yet didn't act on it for two days.   Now, with somebody like Richard, from experience, he deteriorated very quickly.   We are talking about a matter of days from when he was able to function and go to day centres and visit friends and everything, and very quickly, they needed to respond.   They had enough experience to know that they needed to respond quicker.   And so the situation they found themselves in on the 23rd, they went in prepared for a serious situation that didn't perhaps need to be.

**Ms Pucks**: Had they responded two days prior, is that what you are saying?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes, because there are occasions people had gone to him, the services had gone him, and he had taken medication, he had taken it voluntarily.    He ended up in hospital anyway but he was trying to stop himself from ending up from that situation, so he may have responded had they seen him earlier.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.   Thank you.   I would like to ask you about the manner in which your brother was met at his flat on 23 May.   We have referred to the number of police officers and the big rapid response team that attended, and you suggest in your statement that, instead of going in so heavy handed, the clinicians should have sought to provide Richard with therapeutic reassurance from the outset, instead of relying on the police.

What do you mean by that?     I wonder if you could tell us a bit more about that?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: They seemed to threaten him.    He was trying to take control of his life, they needed to get him on board with their actions to show that there was an outcome that didn't mean a loss necessarily of his liberty, overmedication, et cetera.

.. rst-class:: indented

Also Richard responds to my mother, he responds to me, he responded to females in general, and so being confronted with lots of men in riot gear or protective clothing, whatever you call it, just is a challenge -- was a challenge to him.   He could see that he was going to be forced to do something, instead of being persuaded he was going to be possibly forced, he didn't have any choice in the matter.   But when Mum -- I might be going ahead here -- but when my mum, dad and his partner went to the flat, my mother talked to him and she asked the female police officers if they would escort Richard if he agreed to go with them, and so there are ways round these things but they don't ever ask.    They didn't ever ask the family anything, or about him.

.. rst-class:: indented

You know, you get to know somebody you know what they respond to.    Mum knew what he would respond to.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.    I would like to move to the restrictive practices that were used on 23 May when he attended the hospital.    I would like to start with the chemical sedation.    Now, you note across your statement, and you have just told us, about how your mum was able to calm him down before he went to the hospital with the police officers.    You state that Richard was, in fact, calm when he arrived at the hospital and you note to the fact that inquest evidence seemed to confirm that as well: that at least one of the statements suggested that he remained in a calm manner.      But as we have already discussed, within 15 minutes he was subject to chemical sedation, as you put it in your statement.     Do you know what assessments took place prior to these injections?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No.

**Ms Pucks**: So the basis on which that decision was made, do you know?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I think it was made before he even entered the building before he came in, they decided what to do because Richard had a sense of humour, he would play with them a little bit.   So he would have -- "I will walk in, in my own time", you know --

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: -- "I have got control of this".     But he maybe wandered off to, you know, somewhere else he would have been -- could have been persuaded and he was persuaded to go into the right area.    He knew where to go, the whole thing took 15 minutes.   You know.     If he was calm and if he was complying, if he wasn't resisting, when did they make that assessment?

**Ms Pucks**: Your witness statement sets out that there was some known history of aggressive behaviour, which, the way that you phrase it, appeared to drive some of the pre-emptive decisions made about sedation but also about seclusion and a heavy-handed approach more generally. Am I right in understanding here that your point is that these assumptions were not reassessed in light of the man that arrived that evening but were rather made, as you said, before he arrived?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: (Witness nodded)

**Ms Pucks**: Have I understood that point correctly?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I think so.   I can't see anywhere where they reassessed the situation, apart from they said they had a meeting about four hours later and they would like to withdraw these observations.   So at that point, they had some kind of assessment but he was already medicated by then, in the seclusion room, lying on the mattress.    Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: So is your point, essentially, that decisions were made before they looked at who it was that in fact came through the doors at the hospital?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Exactly, yes, it seems like it.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.    You raise concerns about the use of overnight seclusion when Richard was clearly in a vulnerable state on admission.   What concerns do you have about his seclusion?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: From -- I am going from the notes because I never saw the seclusion room.   But the notes that we got from the coroner's inquest said that the patients in the beds just outside the seclusion room were moved, so when they decided to withdraw the observation, they moved the patients out of that unit to somewhere else and then they closed the outer door and they had these other doors, obviously, two sets of doors into the seclusion room they closed one and then somebody was supposed to be sitting outside the second door inside outside of the second door.

.. rst-class:: indented

So that raised concerns for me because he was heavily sedated, apparently just lying on a mattress in a room where one set of doors were closed and the other was open, and there was supposed to be somebody outside. But if he had got into any distress or anything like that, who would have heard, you know?

.. rst-class:: indented

But I don't think he was in a position anyway. I think he was too sedated to do anything.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.     This may link, in fact, to the concern about clinical observations, because you note that Richard's vital signs should have been regularly monitored, especially given his breathing issues and the fact that he was sedated.    From your statement, it appears that the last observation that you are aware of was at 3.30 am when the gold neck chains were observed to be too tight and a few of them were removed with some difficulty.    Now, is it right that, following the inquest, it still remains unclear to you what level of observations Richard was subject to and, therefore, the frequency of his monitoring in the hours prior to his death?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: From the notes, there appear to be only two occasions that his vitals were taken and, from the notes, I can't understand whether there was consistently somebody sitting outside the room, some notes say two people, some notes say one.   When Richard got into difficulty in the morning, I don't believe anyone was outside his room --

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: -- and that they came back and found him in distress, or lack of vital signs, lack of noise -- because Richard would have snored, so they would have heard him breathing.

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: So -- and by then, it was too late.

.. rst-class:: indented

When he -- when -- you mentioned when they took the chains off, it was something like his gold chains, they took three of them.   So nine hours after he was sedated, he was still almost unconscious and not able to help them or himself.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Why weren't they taking more -- taking his vital signs more frequently?   They mentioned about his breathing, they noted about his breathing being laboured and being -- and sleep apnoea, so they were aware of it. Surely he should have been monitored all the time with regular vitals taken.   So, from my point of view, the observations were inadequate.

**Ms Pucks**: I understand.   You have also stated in your statement, and I am going to read it, it is at paragraph 93, I believe, that:

"Our concerns as a family have been amplified by the fact that my parents were subsequently told by ward staff following Richard's death that the staff nurse responsible for monitoring Richard in the hours prior to his death left her post."

What do you mean by "left her post"?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Well, obviously I have got it third hand but my mum recounted and I can't recall now whether it was the same morning that Richard died or the following morning but some of the staff on the ward came to visit them and one particular nurse Mum recounted that she broke down and tears and said she was really sorry, she wasn't observing him when he got into distress.

**Ms Pucks**: Right.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: So from that, my parents assumed that the Trust or that the hospital were taking accountability for what had happened and that they would just get -- I say just -- they would get an apology perhaps at the inquest.    And what they got instead was very uncomfortable, to say the least.

**Ms Pucks**: You note that he had breathing issues which --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: -- should have been recognised and monitored?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: And you note that, had they been recognised and monitored, his condition may not have deteriorated to the point of becoming essentially fatal.   Now, had he had these breathing difficulties in the past, was this something that you think was relatively well known about him?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: It should have been.   It really should have been.   He had asthma, he had bronchitis, he had an inhaler, he had sleep apnoea, and they knew about his breathing and sleep apnoea was a term that was mentioned in their -- in their statements, in one of the nurse's statements. So they had knowledge of it but didn't seem to take that into account in line with the fact that he had very heavy sedation and hardly moved in nine hours, when they came it take these gold chains off him.

.. rst-class:: indented

He wasn't breathing properly when they took the gold chains off him: why didn't they bring somebody -- they were in a hospital, there is a hospital next door, why didn't they bring someone over to check on him at that point, nine hours later.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.   Thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: I mean, I am not a nurse or an expert in these things but, from reading their observations and the notes, you know, I was very distressed to see that -- if you go into a hospital for an operation, which I have been, when you have been under sedation, there is a nurse there all the time checking your vital signs, making sure you come round in a certain amount of time, et cetera.   He wasn't afforded that care.

**Ms Pucks**: Is it the case, essentially, that, even following the inquest, you do not in fact know what happened the few hours prior to his death?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No, I don't.   As I say, there seems to be contradictory statements or statements that contradict each other. There are things that they should have done that they -- that they didn't, and so, no, I don't know.     If I go into a little bit of detail, I don't know whether it is something you will bring out later, but his airways were blocked, his lungs were blocked with mucus, his liver was -- this wasn't a five minute thing.      This had been happening overnight.   It doesn't sound very nice but he couldn't breathe.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: He couldn't breathe.    If you can't breathe, your heart will give out and that's what happened.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: So I don't think, even at the inquest, they looked into it in enough detail.    All that I have received doesn't give me any confidence that they did.    If there's any notes that they used, that we haven't seen, then please let us have them because I would like to understand it better.    To give a verdict of natural causes when somebody can't breathe because their heart gives out because they had a congenital defect in their heart that they didn't know about, it's -- I believe there is something not right.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.   If I may turn to the inquest now and ask you a few questions about that.    Now, I understand you were not personally involved in the inquest proceedings but your family was.   Your family attended, although they were not represented?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Sorry, my mum and dad were going as next of kin and my brother took them.     I wasn't able to go because I was working.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: And they thought it was going to be straightforward so, yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Yes.

**Ms Pucks**: It was a day-long inquest and there were some written statements that were read out and a few witnesses provided oral evidence, and is it right that your parents speak of being blindsided by the Trust's defensiveness and also attacks on Richard's character?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Definitely.   Yes.   It wasn't about the person that they had treated for 12 to 15 hours.       It was they have -- they have really brought out -- well, yes, they ran my brother down completely.    It was almost like it was his fault he was in this situation and the outcome.      They just seemed to be making excuses for what had happened on their watch, if I put it like that.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: And they were traumatised.       They came home from the hearing and my brother as well, and they were just stunned.   They didn't want to hear any more, they didn't want it to be released in public, they didn't want his character to be -- you know, the defamation of character if you like, it wasn't the person that they knew, it wasn't the person that I knew.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: And -- yes.

**Ms Pucks**: Did you feel as though or do you know if your family felt as though they were able to meaningfully participate in the inquest?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No.    My brother pointed out that he knew nothing about the inquest system, what they were entitled to.    They were given a date and asked if they wanted to attend, so they did.     And it wasn't until the end that the coroner said, "Are there any questions you would like to ask?"

.. rst-class:: indented

Well, they listened to all of this, they listened to all those statements, apparently the Trust had a lawyer. There was no jury to – our knowledge or our recollection -- sorry, what was the question?

**Ms Pucks**: Whether your family felt they were able to participate?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No, the answer is no, they knew nothing about the procedure for an inquest, what was expected of them, what they were allowed to do.     They hadn't gone with any questions they hadn't seen any of these statements before.     I don't know if that would have been procedure anyway, but they had no way of knowing what was going to be said or produced at the inquest, and no way of reacting to it either.    They came away quite stunned and upset.

**Ms Pucks**: Do you think that the inquest helped you and your family understand in any way what happened to your brother?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No.

**Ms Pucks**: No?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No.

**Ms Pucks**: You note in your statement that your brother formally notified the coroner's court of his disagreement -- that is the brother that attended the inquest -- of his disagreement with the findings regarding the cause of death.   Did he ever hear back --

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No.

**Ms Pucks**: -- do you know?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: No.    Nothing.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.    Those are the questions that I propose to ask you in terms of the concerns that you raise.

Before we move on to recommendations for change is there anything else that you wanted to say today?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: There needs to be more family involvement in people's care.

**Ms Pucks**: Yes.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: We tried at the beginning and nobody listened to us and then it just seemed as though the only way was keep safe, try and let him be independent and go back to his old life, his old jobs, and everything like that.    And then we just got no that cycle of "Oh, Rich is ill, it has to be at crisis, goes into hospital".   The more that happened, the worse it was for him.    That was also worse for the family.    You have hope at the beginning that that could be an end to it or you could keep it to a minimum but when there are no care plans for anyone to look at, no procedures in place that you can view, nothing you can work towards, other than that cycle, then reacting to it.    So I feel that families should be very much included, wherever possible, and I know that possibly some patients might say "I don't want them to be involved".

.. rst-class:: indented

But they still have -- they can still have a lot of input into understanding the patient because, if you only see the patient when they are very ill, you are in the going to know their character, you are not going to know their personality, you are not going to know what they like, dislike and what they are in the community or -- you know.

.. rst-class:: indented

You just are going to see a sick person and then you will think you have made them better and you send them home.   So that's one thing.

.. rst-class:: indented

Also, the inquest procedure I hope it is different now I did listen to INQUEST, the charity, I did listen to what they said and I do hope it's different because there are so many questions we have 20 or 25 years later that possibly could have been dealt with a lot earlier.

.. rst-class:: indented

My mother's life was totally wrecked.     It was -- she never got over the fact that she persuaded Richard to go in that last time.     In spite of that, he passed away and then, at the inquest, they blackened his name as much as possible, to more or less make it seem as though it was his fault that he ended up in that situation.

.. rst-class:: indented

It wasn't.   He went in calmly, he complied.     She had persuaded him to do it, all so he didn't get hurt and she lived with that.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.   You have set out just now two of the recommendations that you wrote in your witness statement, for which I am very grateful.   So the first obviously being family involvement, and thank you very much for your further comments in relation to that, and also the reform in post-death investigations, the inquest in particular, which you have set out again very helpfully and clearly in your statement.

You also mention in your statement a recommendation to the Chair that the provision of appropriate and individualised care plans is necessary, especially where patient's situations are not allowed to be so critical that the only option for treatment is inpatient admission and you recognise, within that, collaboration with family members.

Thank you for those recommendations.

Are there any other recommendations that you would like to make or is there anything else that you would like to share with this Inquiry at this stage?

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Only that there's a lot of people seeking help for various reasons because they are stranded and I would want them to be able to seek help and not be put off.

.. rst-class:: indented

This isn't about putting people off when they need it and I know there are lots of people who struggle and wait and wait and wait to be seen, and I can't see why there can't be some kind of triage where people refer to a particular body and it is their job to go out and find out what the problem is immediately, and make referrals or signpost the people or give them literature that's going to help.

.. rst-class:: indented

Because there are all sorts of people that need to access extra help, and they shouldn't be afraid to do it and they should be able to receive it, but quickly.

.. rst-class:: indented

The quicker you act on something, to my mind, the less it impacts on their life.   They are not waiting, not able to live their life until they get their problems sorted out.   I really think the quicker the medical service acknowledge that person has a problem, whatever it might be, it my be minor, it could be serious, the quicker that they acknowledge it and give them some kind of a care plan that they can -- and their families can view, I think that would set so many people's mind at rest, to know the timeframe that things will be looked at.

.. rst-class:: indented

I mean, with us, 40 years ago nearly, there didn't seem to be any alternatives.       We were on that cycle, Richard was on that cycle.       As things have progressed, I am sure people are now more accepting of talking type therapies, counselling, behavioural therapy, medication where necessary, groups of people that can share the problem and there seems there are so many different charities and offsprings of the Health Service, you don't know where to start.

.. rst-class:: indented

So if one person was to say, this is -- "You can access this body, there is a group meeting on a Wednesday, you can go along to that", just give them all the information that they need upfront.      Don't leave them waiting and waiting.    Even -- I say even -- ADHD, autism, it just goes on and on.       They need help right at the beginning.

.. rst-class:: indented

In the long-run, it will pay because you won't have that revolving door so much because you help people right at the beginning of their illness.

.. rst-class:: indented

That's all I have to say.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you very much, Mrs Peck, for your evidence today.   You have provided us with a picture of your brother and if I could ask that that be put on to the screen for a few seconds, thank you.

Thank you very much.

**The Chair**: Mrs Peck, thank you very much indeed for your evidence.     We are very grateful for it, thank you.

.. rst-class:: indented

**Catherine Peck**: Thank you for listening.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you, Chair.    Could I ask that we take a short break of 10 minutes, following which if there are more questions for the witness we will take them then and, if there are none, then we will proceed with the closing statement from Counsel to the Inquiry.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Pucks**: Thank you.

*(3.05 pm)*

*(A short break)*

*(3.17 pm)*

**The Chair**: Mr Griffin.

Closing statement by Mr Griffin
-------------------------------

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we are now at the end of this July hearing.     Our gratitude goes out to those who have shared these most personal experiences with confidence, courage and expressions of love.     They are being heard.

We are left with a series of stark images, reflecting a lack of empathy and humanity over the years:

Ed Jackson who was just 18 and alone and bullied on an adult ward; whose belt was returned to him as he had lost so much weight his trousers were falling down and other patients were teasing him; and who died using that belt.

Pippa Whiteward, the mother of a young baby, who was restrained and handcuffed to a bed when she attended A&E in crisis.

Richard Harland Elliott, who, as we have just heard, was heavily sedated and lying in a seclusion room, died alone and whose sister Catherine Peck has serious concerns that he had not been monitored sufficiently.

88 year old Geoff Toms, who the Inquiry heard, "was basically put in a chair and they would take his walker away from him, so that he couldn't get up and move, so much so they even put him in nappies ... even though he wasn't incontinent", who was also becoming malnourished to the extent that you could see his pacemaker; who suffered falls on the ward and, "looked like he had been mugged", and who died within days of admission.

It is difficult also not to be moved by the strong feeling from some of our witnesses that the deaths of their relatives could have been avoided.   Adam Rowe has explained how his family are very angry about the way in which his mother Mandy Hitch was treated and failed, and that, "we all believe that if she had been given the care and treatment she needed and deserved she would still be with us today".

We also heard the deep frustration of families who were not being listened to:

Karon Pimm, a nurse working close to her son TJ Pimm's unit; who was "particularly shocked that despite my repeated calls to the unit, TJ had been assessed without the clinical team seeking my involvement or even informing me that it was taking place.   As the staff knew, I was just minutes away and wanted to provide important contextual information about TJ's presentation and history".   He was discharged without paperwork.    He died later the same month.

Janet Carden, who also had nursing experience and wanted to speak it a member of staff on her brother, W4's, ward; who did not understand "how you can help somebody with a mental health condition, if you don't know what struggles they are having metre world outside the ward"; and Chair, of course, we just heard something similar from Catherine Peck.

Back to Janet Carden, who "had to wait for quite some time outside the glass box before anybody came to hear what I had to say.   It felt a little bit like being the naughty girl at school"; and who was shocked to learn that the staff had allowed W4 to make a financial contribution to their Christmas party, which struck her as "a completely unprofessional and incorrect thing to have allowed to happen".

Jane Maier, sister of Dan Fairman, who was "thrown into an absolute flat spin panic", on being given just two hours' notice of his discharge; who told us his family "were left feeling totally let down by a system that gave us no choice or input in Dan's care"; and who was also left feeling that the British mental health system "can't cope with mental health patients and they don't know what to do with them".

We heard also about Pippa Whiteward, who had been taken far from home -- to Staffordshire and Winchester -- due to the lack of beds in mother and baby units, MBUs, and whose sister Lydia Fraser-Ward "will never be able to imagine exactly what she went through but it must have been so terribly, terribly frightening and terribly hard for her.       And it is deeply unfair ... that they felt that the best way to treat someone in that state was to continually just send them off somewhere else ... it wasn't taken into account how that distance would affect someone ..."

We heard more of the family experiences during the processes that follow a death, including inquests, and anger at the Trust's defensive approaches:

Ed Jackson's family was not legally represented at his inquest, although the Trust was.      His brother Ben Jackson retains "a sense of my mum's anger about that ... inequality of arms".    He spoke of the burden of being asked to hold someone to account whilst "also dealing with the fact that this was incredibly painful on a personal level".

Emma Cracknell gave similar evidence about having to put a complaint in, although it was the last thing she wanted to do, given everything else she was having to deal with following the death of her mother, Susan Spring.

Patrick Brennan told the coroner at the inquest of his son, Liam Brennan, that he found the Trust to be defensive and not transparent.    In his view, the duty of candour should be, "an ethical code by which you live in your working environment.    And it presupposes ... that every day is a school day and that you are going to learn professionally ... both in terms of your continuing professional development but also in terms of genuinely understanding when things go wrong, hold your hands up, and let's make sure it doesn't happen again". That was not the approach exhibited by the Trust in his dealings with them, he said.

Of course, we heard this afternoon that Richard Harland Elliott's family was "blindsided" by the Trust's defensiveness and attacks on his character.

Alan Oxton believes that the inquest, following the death of his father Stephen Oxton, came to the correct conclusion in that the State was responsible.     But it and the other processes he has been through have not given him the answers he was seeking in order to finally achieve some sense of closure.

That brings us to this Inquiry.     Emma Cracknell has described the processes she went through following the death of her mother, Susan Spring, including the inquest.   But at that time she and her father had no idea there were other cases.    They thought it was just them.   She explains that, "It is so sad there are so many others, it is a weird feeling to be relieved to be one of many but to be so sad so many others have been through what we have been through".

The Inquiry will, of course, need to get the Trust and staff perspective of working in mental health inpatient units.    We know that there are many experienced and dedicated people who work hard and in their patients' best interests.    And there were glimpses of good practice given from the perspectives of the witnesses and their family members during this hearing:

Fred Peck spent time both at The Lakes and on the Peter Bruff Unit.   His daughter, Emma Sorrell, described The Lakes as feeling more like a prison than a hospital but Peter Bruff as more of a warm, calming, nurturing environment, both physically and therapeutically -- although there are strongly differing views of this ward over time.

Pippa Whiteward spent one night in Broomfield but it was so bad she wanted to write a book about it afterwards.   In contrast, she wanted to nominate the Staffordshire MBU for an award.    She mentioned an advocate who had an oversight and support role whilst she was there.

In this context, it is important to note that three days ago, on Friday, 11 July, the CQC published its latest inspection report in respect of EPUT's acute wards for adults of working age and psychiatric intensive care units.   The relevant wards were inspected in November and December last year.    The CQC has four ratings: Outstanding, Good, Requires Improvement and Inadequate.   The CQC has upgraded the overall rating for this service.    It was previously rated "Inadequate".    It is now rated as "Requires Improvement".   We are considering the report.

Over the last week and today, we have heard about a range of wards and units and experiences at different times both before and after the merger that created EPUT.   I have drawn both from the evidence in this hearing room and the written statements our witnesses have provided.    The examples I have referred to are just some of the instances contained in the many moving accounts we have received.        There are many more that I could have relayed.     We return to hear more evidence from the bereaved families in our next hearing which starts on 13 October.

NHS England says that, "1 in 4 adults and 1 in 10 children experience mental illness, and many more of us know and care for people who do".        It is common.   It can affect all of us.      But it does not receive the attention it merits.    Chair, I know it is your hope that the Lampard Inquiry contributes to a wider conversation that the public will engage in and that the media will reflect on these experiences.

Thank you very much.

**The Chair**: Thank you.    We are now going to finish for the day.   Before we do so, I just wanted to thank all the members of my team who have helped witnesses in the, I think we can all say, daunting task of formulating and presenting evidence, for which we are very grateful.

I wanted to thank the engagement team, led by Mhairi Hughes.    I want to thank the legal team Kieran Coleman, Hugh Johnson-Gilbert, and the counsel team who took witnesses through their evidence, particularly Rachel Troup, Kyan Pucks and Kirsty Lea.   I am grateful to all of them.

Thank you very much indeed and that is the end of our proceedings for the moment.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you, Chair.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

*(3.31 pm)*

*(The Inquiry adjourned until Monday, 13 October 2025)*

