.. raw:: html

   <a id="hearing-link" href="https://lampardinquiry.org.uk/hearings/hearing-day-07-commemorative-and-impact-accounts/">Official hearing page</a>

Hearing Day 07
==============

.. raw:: html

   <details id="hearing-meta" open>
        <summary>
            <span class="open">Hide video</span>
            <span class="closed">Show video</span>
        </summary>
   <lite-youtube videoid="X9YOIhQ_us4" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   <lite-youtube videoid="0tJU_kvPg-M" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   </details>

*(10.00 am)*

*(Proceedings delayed)*

*(10.13 am)*

**The Chair**: Good morning, everybody.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, today and tomorrow we continue to hear commemorative and impact evidence.       Again, we will be hearing about some distressing and difficult matters, and, as I've said at the start of each week, there is an emotional support service available and it is overseen by the Inquiry's chief psychologist. Counsellors are present here today, and although they have already been introduced, can I ask them just to put their hands up once more?    Thank you very much.

And there is a support services page on the Inquiry website, lampardinquiry.org.co.uk, where further information about services is available, or please just ask a member of the Inquiry team present here today, we're wearing purple lanyards.       As I've said before, we want all of those engaging with the Inquiry to feel safe and supported.

Chair, the first account we are hearing today is by Tim Whitfield, and it's about his wife, Margaret Annequin, or Mags.    And may I ask that the first photograph is put up, please.

Can you see the photograph on the screen in front of you, Mr Whitfield?     Please start whenever you feel comfortable.

Statement by Tim Whitfield about Margaret Annequin
--------------------------------------------------

**Mr Whitfield**: Yesterday would have been our 40th wedding anniversary, me and Mags.      Mags for Margaret.     So her body will be part of nature now.        But here in these pictures, she was alive and still part of nature, a natural beauty.

**Mr Griffin**: Next photo.

**Mr Whitfield**: On the beach somewhere, possibly the Hebrides.

**Mr Griffin**: Next photo, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: Mags loved animals, and if I was driving and she saw an animal in trouble anywhere, I'd have to stop the car and see what I could do.       Here she is with a dog in Canada.

**Mr Griffin**: Next photograph, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: And here she is with three Westies in Holland Park in Kensington.       Two of them were ours.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: Here she is with Bambi -- I don't know what the animal was, but we'll call him Bambi -- in 1962, possibly.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: This is Mags with a donkey.      They should -- they shared the same stillness and resignation.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: Mags on a horse in Canada.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo.

**Mr Whitfield**: We first met at North London Polytechnic, when we were both studying to do a degree in English literature, but this picture I think is of us at my brother's wedding in Paris, in roughly 2005, having a good time.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo.

**Mr Whitfield**: Mags with toothache on our honeymoon in Amsterdam, 1984.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: I like this picture, it's me and Mags at a friend's flat in Tollesbury before we actually moved to Tollesbury together.          And the caption was, "Long as I could be with you.    It's a lovely day."

**Mr Griffin**: Photo, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: Now, a long time ago, Mags with her father and her twin brother Stuart, and a guinea pig and a rabbit.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: This was with our friend Paul in Amsterdam.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo.

**Mr Whitfield**: Mags on the beach on the Isle of Jura in 1989, just Mags on a beach.

**Mr Griffin**: Photograph, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: She was always in transit, Mags, and here's a typical picture of her waiting at yet another airport.

**Mr Griffin**: Photograph.

**Mr Whitfield**: Mags climbs the Crac du Chevalier in Syria, where the crusaders had ensured that they could -- they didn't need to dismount from their horses to get around the place.    That's when we were in Syria in 1998, when it was still a peaceable place.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo.

**Mr Whitfield**: Yes, this is me and Mags in the Sudan.      There was an advert in The Guardian for English teachers in the Sudan, and all you needed to have was a degree, a degree in anything, and we thought, "Yes, that sounds good."    And after a weekend spent in the comfort of Farnham Castle in Surrey to prepare us for the hardships of the Sudan, the fact that the pay was in fact £1,500, not £15,000, was just a minor amendment, and we still carried on to going to the Sudan.      And this was in our house in the Sudan.       Actually it was the only room really in the house that we had, and this is Mags waking up one morning to another jolly day teaching English in the Sudan.

**Mr Griffin**: Photograph, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: This was at our favourite coffee shop on the banks of the Nile, and that shadow which Margaret is stroking is a sheep.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo, please.

**Mr Whitfield**: Margaret preparing a meal in our courtyard.

**Mr Griffin**: Photo.

**Mr Whitfield**: Margaret doing the laundry in our courtyard.

**Mr Griffin**: Photograph.

**Mr Whitfield**: Margaret doing the gardening.    Well, actually that garden where she's doing whatever she's doing, before we left in a few months' time, there was a sunflower taller than me had grown from that.        We had boys delivering us water from the Nile every other morning on their donkey.

**Mr Griffin**: I think that's the last of the photographs that you have for us to share.        Was there anything else you wanted to say?

**Mr Whitfield**: Yes, all these Sudan things reminds me of the wedding in Tangasi.       Tangasi was a rather prosperous town just upriver from where we were in Merowe, and for some reason me and Mags were invited to a wedding in Tangasi.    I can't remember who -- whose wedding it was, I don't think I knew at the time, but we were invited so we thought we'd go, and when we got to the place -- I can't remember how we got to the place, it's about -- it's about six or seven miles from where we lived, along the river, but when we got there, Mags was taken away with the women and I was left with the men, and me and the blokes went to a place where we were each given an angareeb to lie on, that's a rope bed, and then were fed with all kinds of delicacies and lovely things to drink, and music playing, which went on for a while, but then there was a noise at the gate, a clattering and a rattling, and then finally the door burst open and Mags came in -- this was the other side of the courtyard -- and screamed at me "We're going now.         Do you know what they've made me do?       I've been standing up the whole time, there's been nowhere to sit down, we didn't have anything to drink, we didn't have any water, we didn't have any food, and you lying here with all this food.   We're going home now."        And we did.

Well done, Mags.   Yeah, that ... that's it.

**The Chair**: Mr Whitfield, thank you.     That will have made a great impression on everybody here.        We'll remember Mags as we (inaudible).       Thank you.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, it will just be a few moments while we set up the table for our next two witnesses.

*(Pause)*

Statement by Dawn Johnson and Craig Scott about Iris Scott
----------------------------------------------------------

**Mr Griffin**: We'll hear now from Dawn Johnson and Craig Scott about their mother Iris Scott.

May I invite Dawn to come up?

Could you put up the photograph, please.

*(Photograph shown)*

**Ms Johnson**: Well, this is my commemorative account about my mum, Iris Scott, who died on 1 March 2014.

Mum was a loving, strong, energetic, bright, vibrant and full of life.   Mum's favourite colour was red and it truly reflected her personality.    Red was the chosen colour of her bridesmaids in February 1960 and represented her favourite time of year, Christmas, family time.

Born in Stepney in December 1940, mum grew up living in the East End of London with her parents and her elder brother, John.   Mum had a loving and fun childhood and often recounted her family summer holidays in Kent working on the hop farms and family gatherings of a Sunday.

Mum was an intelligent child and at school she was both sporty and academic.   She had a mathematical and problem-solving brain, she loved to learn, and from the age of 12 she attended the Robert Montefiore School in Whitechapel.

When mum was applying for a job in 1955 her headmaster wrote a reference for her saying:

"Hard working, intelligent, she is of marked organising ability and well behaved.    Bright in manner, and possesses powers of leadership.    She is careful of her appearance and always found to be honest, truthful and reliable."

How accurate he was.

From her late teens, mum worked as a secretary and bookkeeper in Holborn.   She carried these skills through her life.    Mum met dad through mutual family friends and they married in 1960, mum aged 19, and dad 24.    And they honeymooned in Porthleven, Cornwall, a place that would become dear to us all.

I was born in June 1961 and when I was five we moved from London to Essex, in fact to the same road as mum's brother John.    I grew up living five doors away from Uncle John, Aunty Eileen, and Debbie and Jackie, my cousins.    We did most things together, socialising both at home and on holidays in Essex, Kent, the Isle of Wight, and they were great times.   We were and we still are a very close family.

Sadly in 1967 my Uncle John was diagnosed with a brain tumour.    Mum was pregnant with my brother Craig at this time, and in October, two weeks after Craig was born, sadly my Uncle John died aged just 31.     Despite just giving birth and being devastated by her brother's death, mum rallied round to help Aunty Eileen.     Our family doubled overnight, because mum helped take care then of Debbie and Jackie, who were then aged eight and three, so that Aunty Eileen could come to terms with her loss and eventually return to work.

Unfortunately, my grandfather also suffered a breakdown on the death of his son, so mum had even more to deal with, but she was strong and nothing fazed her.

In May 1969 my brother was born -- my brother Glenn was born, sorry.    At this time, dad was working two jobs, a job as a salesman and also working some evenings and weekends from the pleasure boats at Westminster Pier.     We didn't have a lot of money, but we never missed out.     Mum just had the ability to make a little money go a long way.

With two young brothers, I was mum's little helper, which somehow she made fun, and I learnt a lot of skills from a very early age.

When we were growing up, mum worked one day at the weekend and one day of an evening at Sainsbury's up in Brentwood.    On the other evenings, she used to cover lampshades, cover coat hangers, cover clothing buttons, anything just to make some extra money, as she could literally turn her hand to anything.   The button machine was good fun, that I do remember, because I used to sit there on her lap, choosing the material, working the machine, and I know I significantly slowed her down, but she didn't seem to mind, she always gave us the time.

We had a happy childhood.    Mum and dad's house was always the centre of activity for both adults and children.    Over the years, mum organised many parties, Christmas, New Year, birthdays, Jubilee, charity.     It was always mum.   She was the life and soul of the party, and very happy to organise.

Mum was happy if everybody else was happy, and she always just put everybody before herself.

Mum also liked to keep fit.   She was a member of a keep fit club with my Aunty Eileen, and they used to perform in displays all over the eastern region.     She was very sporty and would join in all sporting events, especially participate in our school sport days, because she was very competitive, and support all three of us in our chosen sports.

But it was at Christmas that mum came into her own. Christmas was family time, often planned from the summer, soon after my birthday.   The more people the merrier.    It wasn't just a one-day event, it was a three-day package.    Everybody had a job, it was a well-oiled machine, and if I'm honest, if it could have, it got even better when the grandchildren started arriving.

In August 1991, mum's first grandchild was born and, like any grandmother, she couldn't have been happier. Over the coming years, she welcomed another five.       She could not do enough for them.    They meant the world to her.     Mum took pleasure in all their achievements and was interested in absolutely everything the children did.     She was very keen for them to learn and do well at school, and she helped with all manner of creative things for school plays, Christmas, school book days and the like.     She just would help wherever she could.

In the school holidays, again she kept all the children entertained by taking them to many attractions, both in Essex and in London.     Mum and dad also took all of the children to Cornwall where they had honeymooned in 1960 so that they could share their special place. We all have very fond memories.

In the home, mum was in charge of most things, she was very organised, and looked after the filing and the accounts and the general running of the household.       If I'm honest, I don't think my dad got a look-in, she liked to be in control, and she worked tirelessly.      If she couldn't do something, she would learn, and she just didn't shy away.    When I started driving when I was 17, mum also started learning to drive at the age of 38. She then took it on herself to sign up for a starter computer course at the library, and then taught herself at home on Excel.    As I say, always eager to learn. When my brothers were in their teens, mum returned to work at a local company as a secretary and a bookkeeper.

Mum and dad had made lots of friends over the years. When we grew up, they took advantage of travelling as much as possible, and maintained contact with everybody that they met on their way.   When they were in their 60s, mum and dad embarked on a six-week road trip around Europe.   They certainly did live their lives to the full.

My sons were 17 and 22 when mum died.   They both knew I was struggling to write this statement, especially in respect of the impact that it had on the whole family, not just me.    Both wanted to contribute and have their voice heard.    My youngest son wrote:

"I've always said I had the privilege of being brought up by my entire family, my grandmother, nanny, especially.   The woman who taught me to cook, who took me to every swimming practice, sewed every outfit for every fancy dress party, who taught me always to be the first and the last person on the dance floor and told me to put family and friends before anything else.      But the last months of her life sullied the memories that she had built with the people she loved more than anything else.     Her care, or lack of, humiliated her and her condition.    The failings of those entrusted to keep her safe not only led to the horrific and avoidable death, but also undermined and riddled her nearest and dearest of the right and the ability to grieve properly and wholly.     Today they are to blame for a family torn apart by unimaginable wounds that have remained open and bare for the last ten years. For me and the rest of the grandchildren, they took away the loudest voice at our Christmas table, the proudest smile at all our life events, and the most infectious laugh at the end of the phone call we knew to expect every evening.    And regardless of the result of this Inquiry, these are the injustices they will never be able to pay for and the scars they will never be able to heal, and like our entire family, they need to carry that burden for the rest of their lives, so that other families do not have to go through the same inescapable pain."

My eldest son wrote:

"I was doing my master's at university when nan passed away, and for a while I didn't know how to deal with it and it had a huge impact on my studies.   When I was told of nan's death, I was so sure suicide wasn't possible and I considered that she must have been really ill without presenting or had had a heart attack.     So the news of how she died made me question so much of what I assumed daily and still cover this in therapy that I've been an active participate in for the past ten years.   I still don't truly understand how or why this was allowed to happen, and I'm hoping for some more answers by the end of this Inquiry."

On 1 March 2014, my life and that of my family changed forever.   My mother had died, found hanging in her bedroom on Ruby ward, whilst under the care of Essex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust.   On that day, despite a note on my mum's file stating that any news should come through Craig and I -- and I'd like to add that mum was very insistent on this, that dad wasn't disturbed throughout her care -- the ward sent the police to my father's house where he was asleep alone to inform him of mum's death.    In turn, dad had to contact Craig and I.

When I answered the phone at 4 am on that fateful morning, my distraught dad just said, "She's done it. She's done it."    I cannot start to explain the emotions that took over my body at that time.   We had lost our mum in such tragic circumstances.       My sons had lost their grandmother, and also they had lost me.        I was lost.     Our whole world fell apart.

My dad could not cope with the loss of mum, the lady he'd fallen in love with some 60 years earlier, and she was his soulmate and his rock.        My dad gave up, he lost the will to carry on, he just lost his zest for life. He didn't want to be here any more.

Mum was admitted into Ruby ward, for what we were told should have been a three-week quick fix, never to return to us.

To the Essex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, my mum was just one person.        To us, she was our world.

Thank you very much, Chair.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed, very moving. Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

I invite Craig to come up.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Scott**: Iris Scott.   Iris was born on 5 December 1940 in Stepney, East London.      She was born into a working class family, the second child of Jack and Hannah Yems.          Iris had an older brother, John.      Like so many Londoners at the time, Iris' early life was difficult and fraught with danger, spending large periods of time sheltering in London's Underground stations from the bombs of World War II.

During her school years, Iris was a popular, intelligent pupil, with a thirst of knowledge and a keen sportsperson, all of which would continue into adulthood.   During this period, she forged some lifelong friendships.    On finishing school, Iris took secretarial and bookkeeping courses and obtained qualifications in both, which she would later put to good use working for local businesses.

Now in her late teens, Iris met what would turn out to be the love of her life, John Scott, who she married on 27 February 1960 at St Dunstan's church in east London.   They would spend their honeymoon in Porthleven in Cornwall, a location with close family connections that still continue today.    This would ultimately be their final resting place.

On 4 June 1961, Iris and John were blessed with their first child, a daughter, Dawn.    In early '66, the family moved from London to Essex, only five houses from Iris' brother and his family.    This would be the family home for over 40 years, and they would go on to make many friends that lasted the test of time.

Iris and John were always willing to help their neighbours and be key participants in the community, such as fundraisers and events like the Queen's Silver Jubilee celebrations.    Iris was one of the event organisers for the street party and complementing events of the day.

Both Iris and John were keen to add to their family. This proved to be more difficult than they had hoped. It wasn't for another six years they would welcome me into their family on 28 September 1967.    The joy of welcoming a new child into the family was unfortunately marred by the death of Iris' brother from a brain tumour in October '67.

Living in such close proximity to Iris' brother's family, Iris' strong sense of family commitment would be demonstrated, whereby over the subsequent years Iris would often care for her brother's daughters after school or during school holidays when her sister-in-law would be at work.

This extended family dynamic would forge strong family ties that still exist today between the two families.     On May 3, 1969, the family unit would be complete with the birth of my brother, Glenn.

In the years that followed Iris and John would welcome six grandchildren into the family.    If Iris was a great mother, she excelled as a grandmother, ever present, supportive, involved in all they did, welcoming any opportunity to spend time with the grandchildren, always offering to babysit, attend school sports days, a variety of school performances, dance shows and presentation events.   She was so proud of them, and they loved her dearly.

My earliest memories of mum are how proud she was as a homemaker, mother and wife.    Although we were far from a wealthy family, dad often working two or three jobs and mum also working as a secretary and bookkeeper to help fulfil their ambitions for the family, we had a great upbringing and childhood.    I don't think any of us would have changed a thing.    Yes, there were some difficult times, but the fun, laughter and love projected by both of them towards us was unmistakable. We all knew how much we were loved.

Iris was incredibly house-proud, where everything had its place.   Iris knew it would have to be balanced. With two young football-mad sons and a daughter about to enter her early teens, as you can imagine, the house and garden would not always be looking its best.   Mum understood this, encouraging our interests and passions, but when the time came to clear up, we all cleared up, installing some early life lessons, many more would follow.

Mum encouraged us to pursue our dreams, ambitions, and supported us in all our interests, making many sacrifices along the way, even when she didn't quite approve of some of our early career choices.    If that's what we wanted to do, she would support it and be there with encouraging words whenever required.

Mum loved Christmas.      She loved every aspect of the festive season but most of all having the family together was the most important to her.    I have wonderful memories of Christmas growing up.     Although we did not always get what was on our Christmas lists, Christmas felt magical, mum made sure of that.      This would be magnified in later years with the introduction of the grandchildren.

Growing up mum and dad often hosted Christmas and New Year's Eve parties where their open-house approach would welcome family and friends from across the community.   Iris looked forward to these events.    She was a great hostess, where nothing was too much trouble. She was often the first on the dance floor, partying into the early hours.

Family holidays were also great fun.    In my pre-teen years, Cornwall, Devon were typically the most visited locations.   As foreign travel became more accessible, mum would be keen for us to experience other destinations, Malta, France and Spain were some of the first countries we visited.    These family holidays abroad sparked mum's desire to travel and experience more of the world.    Mum and dad would later go on to travel far and wide, Africa, Asia, the United States, the Caribbean and many other European destinations.

How would I describe Iris Scott?      She was the most devoted, caring, supportive and loving mother and grandmother, a strong, independent, modern-thinking woman who knew her own mind and had her own opinions and never shied away from a debate.    I would suggest subconsciously this was one of the biggest things that mum installed into Dawn, Glenn and I, always stand up and fight for what you believe.    It's part of the reason why I'm here today.

Her personality was infectious, she had a great sense of humour, she had many friends, most of which were those she had known for many years, even as far back as childhood.    Mum had style.    She was a good-looking lady.    She enjoyed being able to dress up for an evening out at a theatre, a party or a meal with friends.   Mum liked to experience some of the finer things life had to offer.    She was never out of place or intimidated by her surroundings.       She loved and lived life to the full.     She loved to travel, see the world and experience other cultures.     She was loved by so many.   Testament to that was at her funeral, when so many travelled the length and breadth of the country to pay their respects.   But most of all, she was simply the best mother and grandmother to our children we could have hoped and wished for.    She gave her time and love unconditionally to the whole family and, without exaggeration, we miss her every single day.

The impact of mum's death was immense for the whole family, losing such a loving wife, parent, grandmother and aunty will always be hard, but the manner in which we lost her magnified the experience tenfold.    We were all truly heartbroken with the emptiness that only comes with the grief of losing someone so loved. Unfortunately I'm not eloquent enough to do that justice.

Since that day, many members of the family have had to face their own struggles, coming to terms with the events of 1 March 2014.    For me, it started with a phone call in the early hours of the morning.   I immediately knew something had happened, with an obviously very confused father on the other end of the line, having himself just been woken by two police officers informing him that his wife had taken her own life.     His world and ours would never be the same again.   We would later find out that mum had hung herself in her room whilst an inpatient on Ruby ward, Crystal Centre, which is part of the Essex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust.

From the experience my family and I endured during the inquest, I fear we will never truly know what happened in the events leading up to mum's death, which makes it even harder.

Explaining to my then 17 and 15-year-old daughters what had happened and trying to console them remains the hardest thing my wife and I have had to do as parents. We had gone through our whole lives never having any direct experience of suicide.    How could we know how this was going to impact them?     I cannot speak accurately on how each individual outside my immediate family manage their grief.     I can only speak today for how it's affected me.

On 1 March 2014, I changed forever.     The person I was had gone.     He died with mum.   My own mental health has suffered.     I have changed beyond belief.   These changes impacted my personality, which in turn affected my marriage and relationship with my daughters.      It was only when I changed jobs and moved to a new firm in 2018 my then manager recognised the signs.     He had gone through a similar experience and encouraged me to seek help.   Thankfully, for the sake of my family and my own well-being, I agreed.     With the help of a mental health counsellor I'm now able to understand what happened to me, what is still happening to me, and how to manage it, and possibly most importantly accept it.   The healing is far from over.

Unfortunately the same could not be said for my dad. We all knew the loss would be unbearable for him.      Mum was everything to him, the love of his life, his wife for over 50 years, his very being.    Despite our own personal grief and struggles, we all rallied round to help dad through this difficult time, but following the inquest, dad's health began to deteriorate, he had just given up, he didn't want to be here any more, not without his Iris.    Dad passed away on 13 January 2017.

I appreciate your time today and the opportunity to provide you with a brief insight to who my mum, Iris Scott, was.    I hope I have been able to convey in some small way the positive impact she had on so many people's lives and how dearly she is still missed by all those who knew and loved her.

What I do know is she went through her life putting others before herself, and she deserved far more from those who were responsible for her care in her final days.

Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Could you put up the final photo collage, please.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

We'll just take a few moments to rearrange the desk.

*(Pause)*

Statement by James Nolan about Michael Nolan
--------------------------------------------

**Mr Griffin**: We will now hear the commemorative account of James Nolan about his father Michael Nolan, and it will be read by James's legal representative, Achas Burin.

**Dr Burin**: Commemorative account by James Nolan regarding Michael Nolan.

My dad was born on 30 January 1939 in Billericay, Essex.     He had three brothers and they all got on well with each other.     He had a decent upbringing.   As a teenager he was a motorbike enthusiast, and he even had his own motorbike.

My dad met my mum in a nightclub called Rachael's. My mum was 18 years old at the time.     They hit it off from there and spent a lot of time going out together having dinners together.

My parents had been married for 38 years by the time my dad passed away.     My mum and dad initially lived with my dad's parents.     My mum became pregnant whilst living there.    Eventually they moved into a flat together, got married and then I, James Michael Nolan, was born on 14 October 1983.

I would say that growing up with my dad was a peaceful experience.    I remember that he always seemed calm and collected.    He was a kind, decent man.   He kept to himself, he had his own way of thinking and his own hobbies.   His hobbies were darts and pool, but mainly darts.

So here's the negative part of this story.      From what I could see, it all really started after my nan, my dad's mum, passed away.      This really affected my dad and he became so depressed that he was off work for a long time.    To his family, he often said he was okay, but I now feel that deep down he was mentally unwell.

Over time, he became obsessed about bills and whether there was enough money, but again he wouldn't discuss it in any detail with the family, maybe because of his pride, maybe he didn't want to worry his family, maybe because he was also suffering with other thoughts that made him so depressed and anxious that he could not talk to us.

Eventually, he became more mentally ill and it started affecting his ability to sleep.     One day, the impossible happened.    He tried to kill himself with a knife.   I found him trying to do this and had to disarm him.   An ambulance was called.    My mum was in shock.    My dad was in shock.

He was then sectioned and went into a mental health ward.     My mum and I visited him, and it was clear to us that my dad was not quite right mentally.

Whilst under section on the ward, my dad took his life on 10 July 2022.     I found out about my dad's death via telephone call.     This happened on the ward where he was supposed to be safe and getting better.

I was shocked when I learnt at the inquest of the failings of my dad's care.       I learnt that in the time period leading to my dad's death, my dad was meant to be observed regularly by the staff to make sure he was all right and safe.     But in fact my dad was not properly observed.     I think to myself that if my dad had been properly observed, then maybe he would still be alive today, maybe someone would have seen that he was upset, could have spoken to him, reassured him, and stayed with him.

I don't understand why this happened.   I was so angry, learning these failings happened.       I don't believe that the staff looking after my dad carried out their duties properly.    They didn't give him the care, attention and treatment he so desperately needed.

What happened to my dad devastated me, my mum and both sides of the extended family.      We're all still shocked.    I had to start taking tablets because of the depression and anxiety which kicked in.       On top of dealing with the mental impact of dad's death, it has had a financial impact which hasn't helped in allowing us time to grieve.

I live on.    At some level, if I'm being honest, I'm also angry with my dad for what he did, but then again he was in the right place, in hospital, and the Trust did not do their job properly in looking after him.

My mum still gets upset and always talks about "what if" all the time.     It has impacted us both mentally. I also no longer trust the NHS to do their job properly, which obviously makes things difficult when I need treatment for myself.     I feel that my dad's death could have been prevented.     His life could have been saved.

Thank you for listening to my story.     James Michael Nolan.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Could you take the photo down, please.

Chair, we now come to our mid-morning break.     Could we reconvene at 11.35, please.

**The Chair**: 11.35, everybody, thank you.

*(11.03 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(11.35 am)*

*(Proceedings delayed)*

*(11.38 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: Next we will hear from Ann Sefton.   She'll be speaking about her daughter, Georgina Sefton.       Ann's husband George Sefton is here watching today, and Ann is accompanied at the table by Rachel Troup, Counsel to the Inquiry, and Rebecca Hall of the Inquiry's engagement team.

Statement by Ann Sefton about Georgina Sefton
---------------------------------------------

**Mrs Sefton**: Good afternoon, everybody.

With reference to our daughter Georgina Sefton, you asked what she was like.     Georgina was a good baby, who was always laughing and she grew up into a girl.     She loved music and loved to dance, and she used to dance at home.     Georgina also loved art and was a good artist, just like her dad.

Gina was over the moon when her daughter was born. Gina was thoughtful in 2005 after our son died.      She wrote to the Essex chronicle about me and I ended up winning the Essex achievement over adversity award, all because Georgina wrote in to nominate me.

You can carry on there.

**Ms Troup**: Georgina was a user of drugs.   This we do believe was part of her bipolar.     Going back, Gina whilst at school got on well with her brother and sisters, mostly her brother Tony, who she always went to with her problems.     He used to go all-night fishing and Georgina used to say, "Can I go with him?"    She did and loved it.

As regarding her artwork, Tony taught her how to shadow her drawing, and she was really good, like her brother.    They talked a lot and laughed all the time. Sometimes she would ask him for advice on different things.     She also got advice from her older sister.

Tony used to take her under his wing.        Those were her happiest days, and then something happened.       We don't know what or why she became re-closed and very against the system.

When she was good, she was very good, a bundle of laughs.     And when she was bad, she was uncontrollable. Going forward, we tried on several occasions to get her into rehab and failed.    We finally got her a place in a rehab, and then we were told that Gina had to be three months clear of drugs before they would accept her.     This is something I couldn't understand.   How do you ask an addict to clean up, because if she could stop the drugs on her own, why would she need rehab?

The same applies to the Linden Centre.    We went to go and see her there.     She seemed happy, then something happened and it all went wrong.     We are here now and we still don't know why.

In the Linden Centre they didn't ask for our advice at any time.   Shame on them.    They didn't tell us when she tried to harm herself.      They allowed her to harm herself when she should have been safe.

I would like to know the truth.      I want to know why she wasn't kept safe.

Gina took her life while visiting her friend in London.    At the time, she was an inpatient in the Linden Centre and she was allowed to go to London.      She didn't come back to the Linden Centre in the morning.

I found out that Gina had taken her life when police knocked on my door to say, "We've found Georgina".      I am now a broken woman.

**Mr Griffin**: Please put up the remaining photos.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: I think you've brought the medal with you, haven't you, that we just saw in the photograph?

**Mrs Sefton**: Yeah.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last photograph.    Is there anything else that you've brought with you, Ann, that you'd like to show us?

**Mrs Sefton**: No, just the certificate I got.    What it was is --

**The Chair**: She nominated you?

**Mrs Sefton**: When my son had his accident, I found out that Essex only had two ambulances, so I went door by door to get a local petition, and that's how I got this, and the medal, because there was about -- I don't know -- about 6,000 --

**Ms Troup**: Signatures.

**Mrs Sefton**: Yeah, signatures for the petition for the extra ambulance.    I did get the extra ambulance.   But now that man called Anthony Marsh, who was the head of the ambulances, has gone, I think the ambulance has gone with him, which is sad.

**The Chair**: Well, can I thank both you and Mr Sefton very much for sharing your memories of Gina with us.    That's marvellous.

**Mrs Sefton**: Thank you for having me.

**The Chair**: It's a great pleasure.

**Mrs Sefton**: Is that it?

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Can you take the photo down.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: We have one remaining account this morning.     I don't know if the desk, the table needs to be slightly rearranged before it happens.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: We will now hear the impact statement of Sally Ross. It's concerning her brother, David Ross, and is being read by Rebecca Harris, Counsel to the Inquiry.

Statement by Sally Ross about David Ross
----------------------------------------

**Ms Harris**: My brother David took his own life in 2010 while living in Arnhem Road, a supported living residence in Chelmsford.     He was 40 and had struggled with mental health problems since his early 20s, making several suicide attempts before he finally died.

He was in the care of Essex NHS Trust for most of this time, and spent periods in the Linden Centre.

On the day he died, David told the person on duty at Arnhem Road that he was struggling, and she advised him to go to A&E.     The system precluded her from taking him, apparently.     He never went to A&E that day and that night he took a fatal overdose in his room at the house.

I was living and working in Zambia at the time, and will never forget the dreaded call from my parents. David was gone this time, really gone.

My next strong memory of that period was stepping into the undertakers with my parents to view David's body and the heartrending visceral cry that came from my mum as she saw her son's body.     His death was real.

One doesn't get over a suicide, it haunts a family, and especially parents, forever, and this is certainly the case with our family.

I am writing this now and not my parents as both of them have now passed away.      I'm the only Ross remaining, something I feel keenly now that my parents are gone. Yes, David was struggling and, yes, he wasn't always easy, but he was my brother and my only sibling, and I loved him.    He was also a bright, intelligent, conscientious guy, with a wicked sense of humour, who did his best to leave a positive mark on the world and was much liked by the people around him.

David had faced massive challenges in his 40 years, and seemed to be in a better place at last.      What happened that Sunday?     How was he able to hit rock bottom and take his life whilst in a supported living environment?   I sincerely hope that this Inquiry gets to the root of the issues and makes some solid recommendations for improvements.

To those who receive the report, I ask you please to take serious heed and work to implement the recommendations.   Mental health issues can plague any family at any time.      Please ensure that future families are spared the loss that my family has suffered since David's death.

Thank you.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much.    Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last account for this morning.     That means that we break now until 2 o'clock.

**The Chair**: 2 o'clock.

*(11.50 am)*

*(The short adjournment)*

*(2.00 pm)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we will next be hearing the commemorative account of Paul and Anna Rucklidge-Smith, and it's about Paul's mother, Doris Smith.       Paul will be speaking, but he's accompanied at the table by his wife, Anna.     Could you put up the photograph, please.

*(Photograph shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: Whenever you're ready.

Statement by Paul Rucklidge-Smith and Anna Rucklidge-Smith
----------------------------------------------------------

**Mr Griffin**: about Doris Smith

**Mr Rucklidge-Smith**: Mum was born in Clerkenwell in London in 1945.    She had one brother, two sisters.    She grew up in the swinging 60s in the East End of London.       She went out with friends and had lots of stories to tell about what she used to get up to.    They would sleep on the beach in Brighton, go dancing, and people said mum was the life and soul of the party.

She had me, Paul, her only son, in 1977.     I was brought up with my mum as a single mum, but she gave me an amazing, happy, safe childhood.      We would spend hours in Victoria Park with our dog, Misty, me on my bike, the dog running after me, and eating ice cream.

In the summertime we would often visit family in Clacton and spend time on the beach.    Mum and I went on holiday to Cornwall by train.   I would spend most of the journey running to the buffet car.     She'd also tell me not to put my head out of the window when the train was moving, but yes, I did it.

From the mid-80s mum worked as a typist for Hackney Council, and before she had me she worked in the local pub.   She worked for Hackney Council until she retired and made a couple of good friends there. However, she didn't really stay in touch with them after leaving employment.

We lived in Hackney until 2001, and then we moved to Chadwell Heath.   Mum then moved to Clacton in 2010 to be nearer my auntie and her childhood best friend.     Mum didn't have many friends.    However, she was remarkably close with my aunt and the childhood friend.    Sadly they both passed away within a few years of her living there, and this started to impact her mental health.

Mum cared for my elderly nan until a couple of years before my nan's death.   Nan became too frail and she went into a residential care home in Clacton.

Mum was a homely person but liked to go on holiday with my auntie and my aunt's friend.   They regularly went to Jersey in the Channel Islands and always stayed at the same hotel.

Mum always made sure she went out each day.     She'd walk into town, have a wander around, she had a few casual friends that she spoke to, loved Marks & Spencers, and one of the big things in her life was when M&S closed down in Clacton.

In 2008 mum was diagnosed with breast cancer. However, she made a full recovery from surgery and did not, luckily, have any follow-up treatment.

I met Anna in 2007 and we married in 2008 -- 9.       Mum had an amazing day at the wedding, she spent all the evening on the dance floor with my family.    She said it was the best wedding she'd been to and was enormously proud of me.

My nan was from the north-east of England originally and she wanted to return there one last time, so we went up for a weekend.    We took both of them by car, as it was the easiest way to get there, visiting the street nan was born in, visited the Angel of the North, walked along the seafront, which was freezing cold and windy, but we still had a good time.

Mum loved animals and adopted a cat, Meggie, when we lived in Chadwell Heath, and Meggie then carried on to move to Clacton.   Meggie was my mum's world, she was her little mate, and they had a lovely life together. Meggie passing away also had a significant impact on mum's mental health.   She loved to read and knit, her knitting was stitch perfect, and Anna always wanted her to teach her how to knit, but unfortunately it never happened.

Mum was an amazing mother and an amazing mother-in-law, I think.     She'd drive both of us crazy but she was loving, caring and very kind.    We had some great times together over the years.     She used to like to come and stay with us.    Mum was not the best cook, so she'd enjoy Anna's cooking for the weeks she was with us.   She would eat so much, we never knew where it went, because my mum was about 5 foot 6 and about 7 stone. She had a crazy sense of humour, and me and her had a lot of inside jokes, which other people couldn't understand.

When mum became unwell, our concerns were not listened to by the community mental health team.      Anna is a registered nurse and both she and myself were very concerned about her behaviour.     I have no contact with my dad, so mum passing has just left me with a small bit of family.

Following her death, I had to become very practical as the only child, clearing the house, arranging the funeral, sorting out the finances, but Anna helped me with all of that.    We do not feel we had time to grieve for her, as then the inquest into her death and the campaigning for this inquiry was happening, and obviously sitting here today the nightmare continues.

One day we hope to get closure on this awful period of time and be able to grieve for the mum that I lost.

Mum always said to me that following her death to spread her ashes, which is really unusual, on the runway at London City Airport.      I contacted the airport with this strange request and after lots of emails and phone calls they actually helped me do it.      They took me and Anna and two friends out on to the runway after it closed on Saturday afternoon and I spread the ashes on the grass to the left of the runway.      I often go down there and look over to where she is, which is marked by the wind sock, which is all very strange, but ...

That's about it, really.     There's not much more I can add.

**Mr Griffin**: Could you play the slideshow, please.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last photograph.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed for letting us hear about Doris.   Thank you.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we're going to hear from our next speaker in just one moment.    I'll just allow the table to be rearranged.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Can we have two chairs, please.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.    May I ask Julia Hopper to come to the table.

**Mr Griffin**: Julia will give her commemorative and impact statement about her son Chris Nota, and she's accompanied by her legal representative Nina Ali.

Could you put up the photo.   Thank you.

Julia, please start whenever you feel ready.

Statement by Julia Hopper about Chris Nota
------------------------------------------

**Ms Hopper**: My son Chris Nota must be dead because I am sat here, and I still just can't accept it.

Thank you to my great friend Melanie Leahy who I found out about around five and a half years ago on social media when I was beginning to advocate on behalf of large numbers of children with additional needs, as well as my own, in Southend-on-Sea, where we lived.

In the town where I live, Southend, the majority of our disabled children were attending mainstream education with inadequate and inappropriate assessment or support.   Over the years, we have seen, for example, eight-year-old children within this group with suicidal ideation who can access nothing.    It is my belief that this sets the scene for their suffering to escalate.

Christopher Sampson Nota.    Chris was born on 30 December 2000, the eldest of three autistic boys, all approximately two years apart, and when he was a year old we moved from Chelmsford to Southend because it was once a great place for a child to grow up.

Chris had classic autism, and was assessed at Great Ormond Street for this, with an IQ of 58, which put him well within the threshold for learning disability services.    He later also developed epilepsy.

As a baby, Chris was extremely demanding.    He screamed a lot, and I could never put him down without him screaming like a fire alarm.    When he was small, he would play Thomas the Tank Engine over and over again, repeating the script.    It was so comforting to him.      It was how he learnt to speak.    There were so many things that he did not yet do, but he could sing.    He could not hold a conversation with me, but if I sang a song to him while he bathed and I stopped mid-line, he could complete it in perfect pitch.    His voice was heavenly. We would laugh together with such joy over that.      He would later go on to say that music was his therapy.

He mostly ate yellow food as a small child.      It was extremely challenging, looking after him and ensuring that he was safe.    I would have to be very, very organised, careful and safety conscious, for he knew no fear.    He had no patience, and he was impulsive.   He would climb out of a window on a hot day and serenely walk on a slanted conservatory roof, or take off on one of his beloved scooters to explore the neighbourhood. I would have to chase and catch him.    He would run into a busy road if his hand were not held at all times.

I knew that he loved me.    We were very close because of his disability.

As a small child he would weep if I drove home from school taking a slightly different route or if the lampposts along the street had missing bulbs.     He looked for patterns and connections in a deeply confusing world.

When he was very little, he would walk up to other children in the park and say, "Cashier number 3, please", a phrase that he had heard at the bank, because he had no idea what else to say in order to make their acquaintance.    If he got really carried away and lost for words, he might bite them, a little nip, but children never seemed to mind that.

Chris struggled to sleep, so for the first eight years of his life I went up to sleep beside him at 8 pm every night, holding his hand.     It was nothing to ask of me, since he so obviously deserved this.      It also meant that I could be up and have a clear and focused head from 6 am, and keep him safe and occupied.     I very, very rarely left him.    It would have disrupted his routine, and it would have upset him.

After two scary burglary attempts, I sold our house when Chris was 10 and we moved into a large house with my parents and Chris's two younger autistic siblings. We are mostly an autistic family, a very independent one.    I had lost my own brother, also named Chris, when he too was 19.    He had ended his life with his own hand unexpectedly.     I now suspect that he was autistic too. My big brother's loss was devastating.     It made me feel very protective of the boys.

Chris was determined to attend mainstream school, but he had to have a one-to-one helper with him to be able to cope and to manage his day.     As he grew into his teens, he would stop at the park on his way home and he would sometimes return bruised.     He would always refuse to say how it happened.      Sadly, one or two teachers at school and college also made it their mission to sort him out, because he looked so normal physically that they didn't believe that he was genuinely disabled.

In the evenings after school he was always exhausted.   Sometimes he would lie on the pavement and people would ring me to ask if he needed an ambulance. I wanted to wrap him in cotton wool, but he refused to let me.

Chris did not wish to look or feel different.        He became increasingly skilled at masking who he really was, and concealing his feelings.   He often pretended to be someone he was not, all the while I think his anxiety and depression were building up inside.

I remember once driving him along the beach before school and chatting to him to reassure him about the world.    As I drove, he nodded away.   I remember feeling that we had made progress in our communication.     As I pulled up, I said something along the lines of, "So, do you agree?"   He turned and looked at me, and then he removed his earphones.   He had been listening to music and nodding away to the beat.   He had not heard a word.

Chris was slowly becoming able to be more independent, relishing every part of that sense of freedom, using the school bus, and developing a great passion for walking, being with friends at the park.          We felt so totally blessed.    We travelled and spoiled the boys.

We never expected life to be easy, our lives were good enough.   Very sadly, my late mother was diagnosed with advanced ovarian cancer in 2014 when Chris was almost 14.   She fought against it for two years with our help.    We all pulled together and our home remained a very happy place.    However, her death and that of my two aunts at roughly the same time, also from cancer, was enough, combined with being bullied and dealing with school, to completely break Chris's spirit overnight. He could not reconcile the brutality of it all and it became too much for him to bear.   Outwardly he claimed to be absolutely fine but events were to prove otherwise.

In 2016, on a rainy Monday morning, Chris left for school but never made it there.    Instead, [Chris   attempted to end his life].     He hesitated and was saved by a heroic guard who took him to our GP opposite, and I rushed to collect him and take him to A&E, where he was briefly spoken to by a mental health nurse and released to me with a EWHMS, children's mental health team, mental health assessment with a psychiatrist organised for two weeks later.    He was 16.

During that two-week wait, he developed a plan not to eat and to reach a target weight of one pound.       He began to cut his arms and legs.    For reasons that are not clear, EWHMS cancelled his psychiatrist assessment appointment by leaving an answer phone message.        In desperation, I went to our GP for help.     None was forthcoming.

We provided scaffolding to his life as best we could thereafter, with the help of the good friends that he made and loved.    Time passed.   He began to really improve.   He had a short period of happiness at college, but he'd been introduced to cannabis.

Chris became acutely psychotic and suicidal again in April 2020.    I think a significant causative factor was the global pandemic, which led to a very restrictive living conditions.    We had all been told that we could not leave the home.    This terrified Chris.   He went missing and was found on [a] bridge many miles from home.    His life was saved but he was not sectioned. He was sent home in a taxi, while in what was clearly a psychotic episode, with no notice, and immediately went missing again.

From this time onwards Chris ricocheted in and out of the hospital, multiple suicide attempts, both in and outside, with a revolving door.     It was absolute chaos.

My grandfather spent four years in a concentration camp.   He never ever spoke of it.    I now understand why. The mention of some things pollutes and toxifies the earth because it is so wrong and so ugly.     I can't bring myself to deal with too much detail of what went wrong today.   The time will come shortly when I will ensure that every single horrific issue is addressed.

What I knew was that our beautiful, glorious boy desperately needed help and didn't get it.     He died on 8 July 2020 after falling from a height in Southend.          He was under the care of Essex Mental Health Services and Southend City Council at the time, because I had demanded he be in a place of safety, having been repeatedly discharged while still unwell.     He was in their care because he was not safe at home, and EPUT kept discharging him regardless.    I was told that he would be safe.

The coroner ruled that EPUT, South Essex ICB and Southend City Council had contributed to his death together.    EPUT apologised in a letter.   I have asked repeatedly but no apology has been forthcoming from the other two.

When Chris died in public, on one of the most beautiful days of the year, people were going about their day and were forced to witness it.     They have suffered beyond measure.    I think of them always.      My heart is with them.   He would have hated the impact of this upon them.   He was too ill to notice.

I am autistic, and I sometimes struggle to show emotions.     Most of my emotions are masked to spare others.     It has become my way.    So sometimes I appear unemotional.    I may appear to be fine, but often this could not be further from the reality.       I've had to take Chris's death and place it in a sealed box mostly, like I had to do with my brother.        This is how we survive. If I were not to do this, I would be paralysed.       I am very aware of the need of those around me for stability. I don't get to indulge in screaming and collapsing.           It serves no purpose and makes others fearful.

I have been devastated by the loss of my son and severely traumatised by the circumstances in which it took place.    My suffering continues.     I have terrible panic attacks if I have to go out even shopping and leave my children.    It is something I do rarely.     I am now diabetic and have been diagnosed with PTSD.       My blood pressure at one point became so high that I had to be admitted to hospital.     I don't really sleep.    I am so tormented that the only thing I feel I am fit for is supporting my community who understand me.       That might take me to Westminster with a banner in the rain, or to the cells of a police station to support a vulnerable young person suffering with untreated mental illness on Boxing Day, or a comprehensive school where a mentally ill child is being treated as if he were a truant and his distraught mother wrongly threatened with a fine for his non-attendance.   My hair comes out in clumps.       It keeps me busy and stops me dwelling on what was and what should have been.

I try to speak generally and not to speak about my family, my boys, because if I allow myself to feel anything I will hit the floor and never get up.      I know that nobody has our back.    Perhaps my emotions are masked, perhaps I have simply just become mostly totally numb, because of what I have seen, and in the knowledge that it still goes on and threatens many openly, including my own family.

Our home is on the market at a very reduced price, and we wish to leave the UK quickly and forever.     We do not feel remotely safe.     I can't leave soon enough. Nothing has been done to protect or reassure us.

Just after Chris's inquest ended in early 2023, the police contacted me to collect his effects from the day of his death.   They refused to drop them to me at home, explaining that I was not feeling strong enough to attend the station.   They coldly said they were busy. I had to force myself to go there and stand in a queue in reception alone, whereby a transparent carrier bag containing my son's shoes, wallet and mobile phone I had not seen for three years were coldly tipped out on to the public reception desk in a busy room and I was asked to confirm them as being his.    It took my breath away to see them again.   They were so much a part of him.    It was deeply painful and dehumanising that nobody could see my need for dignity and privacy and a little empathy.

There have been many such times at the hands of other local agencies since Chris died.    I can confirm that both of Chris's brothers, who showed great academic and sporting promise and achievement, despite their own challenges, and worked very hard, have not been in education since his death.     After we lost Chris, the two of them became unwell, with one of them unable to access appropriate basic statutory support, while the other was subject to a virtually identical systemic negligence to that suffered by Chris.     They are not remotely recovered.

We feel entirely instinctively unable to ever trust anyone.    I have been forced to drag myself to court on my own, bereaved and traumatised, to fight the same agencies for other members of our family, and win standing against their paid barristers for those rulings to be effectively ignored by them openly.

The judge said that the case should never have come to court.   So why did it?    Somehow I have to attempt to live with the knowledge that the majority of people paid to keep our incredible Chris, along with so many others, safe knew that he was at great risk and did not act as they should have done.

In internal emails sent during that very short 11-week fight, when Chris became unwell in 2020 and needed to be safe, but was repeatedly discharged, clinicians wrote in their internal emails:

"No amount of expertise and/or intensive monitoring can safeguard someone who will act in this way without any trigger or warning.      Plans have failed too many times in the last few weeks.      Chris can't keep himself safe.   We are not able to help him remain safe either. God forbid we are going to the coroners court."        [As read]

And at inquest:

"There were no contingency plans in place to meet Chris's needs in the community."      [As read]

The Coroner concluded that I had fought ferociously for my son's life.    They all had each other.      Chris and I were alone.   I was left to try to hold onto my son. I fought ferociously.     I'm still fighting.     My body is still full of adrenalin.      Those who loved Chris Nota get no breaks, no closure.

I remember having to fly my two surviving children abroad to my elderly father, since no support was offered to us, in order for me to attend a three-week Article 2 inquest and leave them, and travel to and from 40 miles a day.    That inquest had to be adjourned because it came to light that thousands of pages of critical evidence had not been given to independent investigators by EPUT.

I had to fly over and tell my family that the inquest was adjourned for months, and we had to try to have some kind of a Christmas with it all hanging over us.   I remember going to the bathroom and vomiting blood, and then just washing it away as if it hadn't happened.     I was so numb.

I brought one of my sons back after the inquest and left one in Portugal with dad.      I miss him very badly. We will join him as soon as possible.

I have lost all faith, hope and trust in this broken nation.     It would take the second coming of Christ now to convince me otherwise.      What we need is a broad and uncompromising inquiry that encompasses every issue, every agency, every death and serious failing, both inside and outside, and if not, why not?

From all of the unitary local authorities in the geographical Essex area, the integrated commissioning boards, EPUT and NELFT, the friendly quangos that bolster them, Essex Police, the LGO and the PHSO, Ofsted, the CQC, NHS England and more.   Potential frauds and the like also need exploring.

People like me are told that we are greedy in attempting to address these issues and wanting to establish basic safety, told that money is limited.      But is it?    Or is someone diverting it before it gets to where the taxpayer in good faith wishes it to go?

This present system is rotten, poisonous, radioactive and corrupt, crude and medieval, toxic and hellish to its absolute stinking core.

Christopher, we love you.

**Mr Griffin**: Would you put up the photograph, please.

*(Photograph shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: And would you play the video.

*(Video played)*

**The Chair**: Thank you so much.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, it's time for our mid-afternoon break. May I suggest that people return at 3.10.

**The Chair**: 3.10.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

*(2.40 pm)*

*(A short break)*

*(3.10 pm)*

**Mr Griffin**: We will next hear the commemorative and impact statement of June and Roy Dicks.     It's about their son, Terry Dicks, and it will be read by their granddaughter and Terry's niece, Daisy Wakefield.     Chair, June and Roy are also present here today.

Put up the photo, please.     And Daisy, please start whenever you feel ready.

Statement by June and Roy Dicks about Terrence Dicks
----------------------------------------------------

**Ms Wakefield**: I'm reading this on behalf of my nan and grandad.

Our son, Terry, was born in St Thomas' Hospital on 17 August 1971.     We lived in Clapham until Terry was nine years old and then moved to Benfleet.    Terry has an older sister.

Terry went to Thundersley Primary and Deanes Secondary School, making many friends along the way.      He did really well at school, achieving seven O levels and then went on to work in London, gaining further qualifications in the finance world.

For the 16 years he worked in the City, he spent lots of time travelling to and working in Tokyo, Hong Kong and New York until he was made redundant from his job in 2003.    At that time, his beloved son was born and so Terry decided to work locally as a taxi driver so that he could be near and spend time with his son.

When Terry was around five years old, he was diagnosed with coeliac disease, an allergy to gluten. In recent years, Terry laughed that his condition had now become trendy and he could actually find nice things on the supermarket shelves that he could eat.     But, as a teenager, he didn't want to stick to his special diet. We found this out when he came home from a school trip with the stench of rotten food coming from his suitcase. That was Terry, always having to clear up after him.    He managed to keep himself very clean and tidy, but let's say no more about his surroundings.

As Terry grew up he had many interests but his real passion was always for football.   His love for Chelsea was influenced by his dad and he then shared this passion with his son.   All three of them regularly attended England and Chelsea games over the years and had lots of stories to tell us all, many of which include language that can't be repeated.

This love of football led to him coaching his son's team when he was younger for a few seasons.     Terry and his son also went to watch Southend games together. They always stood behind the goal in the hope that they would be on TV if Southend ever scored.

Terry, however, did manage to claim five minutes of fame on a few other occasions, which used to make us all laugh.    His first TV appearance was when he was interviewed by Ben Brown at the Champions League final in 2012.    Unfortunately, you would have only seen it if you were up in the early hours of the morning.

Terry had a natural thirst for knowledge and was very passionate about the world around him, always wanting to know more.    He never held back on sharing his thoughts and views with us, loving a family debate over a few sangrias on holiday, and often made us laugh unintentionally.    It was this love for general knowledge that led to his more recent TV appearances where he starred in two quiz shows, Perfection and The Chase.    He won the main prize of £6,000 on Perfection, and told Nick Knowles that he was going to treat us all to a family holiday with his winnings.    We're still waiting, Terry.

Holidays have always played a big part in family life with Terry over the years, and he always kept everyone amused, even from a young age.     We recall a particular holiday to Cornwall when Terry was about four.     The holiday started with Terry finding a marble in the suitcase, which disappeared very soon after. Yep, he'd swallowed the marble.    The next days were then spent inspecting his poo waiting for the marble to return.    What a way to spend a holiday.

For over 20 years we've had annual holidays as a family to Lanzarote, where we've made the happiest of memories.    The stories we could share are endless, but here are just a few that sum up Terry and our times together on holiday.

A few years ago Terry stayed in an apartment at the side of the main villa with his son and his niece.     We called them the three musketeers because Terry was always encouraging them to get up to mischief.   Every night they would watch a late-night movie and Terry would get them to sneak back into the main villa to secretly get crisps, chocolate and lemonade to snack on. His son and his niece both have such fond memories of this time, causing trouble, staying up very late and being so tired that Terry carried them both to bed.

Every day on holiday Terry would keep us amused in some way or another, whether he meant to or not.   He would try to climb up trees to collect pineapples that definitely didn't grow there.   He never quite mastered sun cream application, despite all the holidays we went on, and he always looked like he'd put a whole bottle on.

On one holiday he jumped over what looked like a small wall, not knowing that there was a 6-foot drop the other side.    Terry disappeared from sight, and now this wall has become a famous Lanzarote landmark in our family, making us laugh every time we walk past.

One of our most memorable nights from our holidays is when we were out for his niece's 18th birthday.     Our evening started with a nice sophisticated cocktail on the seafront, but after a couple more and a couple more after that, we thought it would be a great idea to recreate the film The Hangover.   We all woke up the next day and looked through the photos from the evening, just as they do in the film, and it's safe to say we did the film proud.   Terry's brother-in-law has never forgiven Terry for posting some of these half-naked photos on Facebook.

It was silly things like that that really made Terry laugh and his sense of humour was something he and his son shared.   They would always have lots of private jokes, probably sometimes at our expense, and this is when Terry's contagious laugh would come out.   He would laugh so loud that he would go red in the face and cry uncontrollable happy tears.   Even when we had no idea what he and his son were laughing at, Terry's proper laugh would make us all join in laughing with them.

In recent years, another interest of Terry was spiritual healing, and he gained a certification in this.   Despite some dubiousness, his nan and his uncle had Terry perform some healing on them.    She was impressed with the results as her wrist always felt much better after these sessions and also sent her into a deep sleep.     As his uncle was never a believer in this type of therapy, he was shocked by how much his knee had improved after.    Unfortunately, the times Terry tried to make us levitate off the sun loungers on holiday didn't see the same success, although it did cause lots of laughs.

This interest allowed Terry to express a different side to him that perhaps not everybody saw.    He was always a sensitive soul and showed much compassion for others.    He volunteered at One Love soup kitchen helping the homeless people in Southend.     Staff have told us what a kind hearted man he was and how he worked so hard to help the homeless find shelter and have food during the bad snowy weather in the winter.

Even in the days before he passed away, when he was shopping with his sister, he went looking for a homeless man he'd met at the soup kitchen.    He wanted to make sure that he was okay so that he could let his brother know.     These acts of kindness are a true demonstration of Terry's sensitive and caring character.

Terry was also extremely intelligent.    Sometimes we think maybe he was too intelligent for his own good. Nevertheless, his intelligence was something that came across to anyone that met him.   He enjoyed writing poetry and had two poems published, and he wrote a prayer.

The main thing that stands out is the fact that Terry really was the best dad.   He and his son were truly mates and they adored each other.    We know that Terry would have been so, so proud of his son when they received the Jack Petchey award for being the best student of the year at school.

We appreciate that this is not the forum to talk about the care and treatment that Terry had received in respect of his mental health and, therefore, all we will say at this point is that Terry became unwell and he was sectioned in April 2015 for 28 days, his second section was December 2016, and his last section October 2017.

Terry sadly ended up taking his own life on 16 April 2018.   The emotional impact and devastation on our family is profound and overwhelming.   Terry's sudden and unexpected death left us all in shock.    We all still struggle to comprehend the reality of what happened.      We often say that we feel emotionally numb and know that this is a coping mechanism to temporarily shield us from the unbearable grief.

Daily battles with feelings of guilt consume us.      We all still question what we could have done differently, despite knowing that we did all we could as a family to help Terry.   This overwhelming sense of responsibility has led to severe emotional distress for all of us.

The nature of Terry's death and the circumstances surrounding it has meant a lack of closure for us all as a family as we were unable to say properly goodbye.

We now know that the journey of grief we're all in is unique and complex.    It often leads to prolonged sadness, difficulty functioning and severe emotional pain.   His son, who was only 16 years old when he lost his dad, is still trying to process what happened and is struggling to come to terms with it, often feeling in a surreal situation.    Now, at 21 years old, he should not be having to navigate these unimaginable feelings and emotional distress.      He is starting to realise that these feelings will stay with him for the rest of his life and won't get any easier to deal with.      We feel so very sad for his son.     He has countless happy memories with his dad, but he has lost future years of love and support from his dad, and to feel that wonderful life that they could have had together has been cruelly taken way from them.

Thankfully we take solace in the fact that we're very close as a family and try our best to support each other through this tragic and totally avoidable devastation.    This close family relationship and all the memories we have made since Terry's passing should include him.

This is something we will never get over.

**Mr Griffin**: Could you put up the remaining photo, please.

*(Photograph shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

**The Chair**: Daisy, thank you very much for reading that to us, and thank you both very much for letting us hear about your son.     Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, there may be a short pause just as we rearrange things for our next account.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: The final commemorative account we'll hear today is by Ann Marsh.     It's about her husband, Sacha Marsh, and it will be read by Ann's legal representative, Agata Usewicz, and Ann is present here today as well. Could you put up the photograph, please.

*(Photograph shown)*

Statement by Ann Marsh about Sacha Marsh
----------------------------------------

**Ms Usewicz**: Thank you.

My husband Sacha was born in Brentwood.     His parent separated fairly early in his life, resulting in him living with his mum.     He had a half brother and a half sister from his father.      He remained in contact with his father throughout his life.      Sacha's mum was and still is a hairdresser.     She was a working mum and so Sacha spent a lot of his time with his grandparents, Peggy and Bernard, and also his aunty and cousin.     As Sacha was an only child, he enjoyed doing things solo, such as making aircraft models, doing Lego.      He was into very creative things.

Sacha was never diagnosed as neurodiverse, but during this process of creating this commemorative statement, I could see in his school records that this was glaringly obvious.    Sacha attended secondary school less and less, despite having the intelligence to achieve.   One teacher wrote in his report that he was the most gifted physics pupil he had taught.

After school he went off to become a mechanic.     He completed the course and became a qualified mechanic. He also worked at a couple of other local companies.

We met in 1995.     I had a computer and Sacha gravitated towards it, and from that moment he attended evening school, three to six hours a week, and he received his computer certificates.     From then on he continued to complete computer courses over many years and ended up becoming an IT manager in the City for a finance company.    One of his most challenging courses he passed was to become a qualified Cisco professional. The books he had to plough through to achieve this was amazing, especially with the fact that he was neurodiverse.

He enjoyed his career and travelled to Ireland, Canada and Malaysia.    I believe that due to Sacha's difficult school life, most likely due to the lack of proper support, he was always concerned about losing his job.    He would have imposter syndrome and didn't always feel confident about his abilities, but he was so capable.

Sacha's work ethic continued throughout his illness and he showed sheer motivation and determination to get better.     He wished to overcome what was happening to him.

Sacha and I met in 1995.   I was working in the City, and would work in a bar in the evenings.     Generally, when people would come up to me at the bar and ask me out on a date, I would say no.     With Sacha this was no different.    I said no the first time he asked me out. He came to the bar again and he asked me out again, but I was not paying attention and so I said no again. After I had said no I couldn't believe I had rejected him because I actually did want to go out on a date with him.     We had a mutual friend who told him to ask me out again, and he asked, and I said yes.     The third time was a charm, and we went out on that date.

I was working in the City at the time and I had my own flat.    Sacha moved in with me and we discussed our five-year plan.    I actually fell pregnant in 1997 with my eldest son, which sped things up a bit.     We bought a house which was rundown at the time and we moved in a month before our first son was born in September 1997.

I went back to work three to four months after giving birth to our second son, but -- sorry, to my son, but reduced my working days to three days.     Sacha at the time was working five days in IT, but he wasn't a manager at that point.

We got engaged on Christmas Day, and we married in March 1999.    We got married in Las Vegas at Graceland Chapel.     In August 2000 our second son was born, and then in April 2004 our third son came along.     Sacha also had a daughter from a previous relationship.

Sacha was an amazing father and husband.     He was always doing what he could, he was very much a family man and we did a lot together as a family.

On my 40th, he surprised me with a meal and then we also went for a surprise weekend away.    He was always so thoughtful with getting gifts.    He bought me earrings and put them on a teddy bear for me.     There was one time when he created an amazing pyramid where I had to pull two cotton strings for it to open and the gift was then inside.

When he was on a business trip to Canada near Christmas time, he asked me what I wanted, so I asked for some trainers, but he also got -- he got them and also put a diamond necklace and earrings hidden inside the trainers.

He was so creative, and was always building things. He promised the boys that he would build them a den, so when he built our summer house, he built an upstairs den on the top for them to play in.

Sacha had a wide circle of friends.    He was so funny, and a crazy dancer.    When Sacha was younger, he was good at swimming and gymnastics.   He was also into motocross and cars.   There was a time we bought the kids a trampoline and he built it the night before so as to surprise the boys the next morning, and then to test it he bounced and did some somersaults.   Sacha was also into weight training when that was a big thing.

We travelled a fair bit.     We went to Menorca as a family and we stayed in a villa there.    For a couple of years my parents came with us to help with the boys, and we also went to Rhodes.

When the family grew up, we drove to France.   We would load the car up with all the gear.   Sacha, being the IT person, would get there -- when we would get there and he would have laptop set up, film set up, internet and everything, despite the fact we were camping.

It was in France that Sacha first became ill.      As I have been going through the documents to prepare this commemorative statement, I've realised how badly Sacha was failed.   It's exactly the same things that Sacha was suffering from that other people are also suffering from, and it's likely that the same errors are still occurring.

I have been suffering from trauma and shock since Sacha passed, the lack of care and lack of service from the Health Department, combined with the willingness of Sacha wanting to get better, stays with me.     Sacha would plead with me to get help and we were on waiting lists. However, Sacha was treated as if his illness wasn't important and didn't require emergency treatment.

When Sacha died, the immediate impact was a horrendous practical one, as we were completely without income.   At the time I was a registered childminder, so I couldn't take care of other children because I needed to look after my own children.     They were obviously in shock too.   One of my sons is so traumatised he was unable to speak in the house, and thereafter he couldn't even bear to hear anyone speak about his dad.

I had to claim sickness benefits for a while, but I was told that I would have to go to London for in-person assessments.   I was still too traumatised to travel to London or go on a train, and despite requesting an assessment elsewhere and explaining why, this was refused, so the sickness benefits were stopped.

To me this experience is typical of large organisations, be it government or health service, that show a lack of understanding and empathy or seeing people as individuals with individual circumstances.

This happened while Sacha was ill, and it also happened a couple of years ago.   I requested the recording from Sacha's inquest.   The Coroner had ordered that they be kept for 15 years until the children were older.    At first the Coroner's Office denied the existence of the recordings until I had email proof, and then finally they admitted that they are lost.   The reason?    They had moved offices and "it happens". Another example of lack of care and empathy.    It is as if Sacha was not important to them, even after his death.

The process of trying to get Sacha help and get support was so traumatic and stressful for him and for all the family.   I have had some counselling after Sacha passed away but after a while it got too much, as it is traumatic speaking out about it again and again.      One thing that really stays with me is that the medication that Sacha was put on, it took the essence and soul out of him.   His spark was removed and no one cared to listen.   Sacha battled his illness with determination and to the best of his ability.

For our children, it was horrendous losing their father.   They were extremely upset.   The impact is still ongoing for them to this day.     One of our sons is so traumatised that he still doesn't attend family events very well.

The children wrote Sacha letters to put in his coffin.   The eldest son wrote:

"At least you won't be suffering any more."

Our eldest son had taken on a lot of responsibility while Sacha was ill.   He would sit with Sacha when he was hearing things.    Our middle son simple wrote "I love you", and our youngest drew a bottle of milk on his letter.

Everything happened so quickly, all within a six-month period.    Whilst all family events are difficult for us, Christmas is a particularly hard time of year.    The impact is forever.   We will continue to miss Sacha and his loving, caring personality.     He was the most amazing soul, and he has left a deep void in our family.

**Mr Griffin**: Could you put up the remaining photographs, please.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last photograph.

**The Chair**: Thank you.   Thank you very much indeed for letting us hear about Sacha, and for sharing some very lovely photographs.     Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last account for today, so we return tomorrow at 10 am.

**The Chair**: Thank you, and thank you to everybody who's given us a commemorative account today.    Tomorrow at -- sorry, what time did you say?

**Mr Griffin**: 10 am.

**The Chair**: 10 am, thank you.

*(3.36 pm)*

*(The hearing adjourned until 10 am on Tuesday, 24 September 2024)*

