.. raw:: html

   <a id="hearing-link" href="https://lampardinquiry.org.uk/hearings/hearing-day-04-commemorative-and-impact-accounts/">Official hearing page</a>

Hearing Day 04
==============

.. raw:: html

   <details id="hearing-meta" open>
        <summary>
            <span class="open">Hide video</span>
            <span class="closed">Show video</span>
        </summary>
   <lite-youtube videoid="waBgEYREGIk" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   <lite-youtube videoid="SKpC3A_YMfk" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   </details>

*(10.00 am)*

*(Proceedings delayed)*

*(10.05 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, the purpose of this hearing is now changing.     Whilst you heard opening statements last week, we now move to hear commemorative and impact evidence from some of those most closely affected by the issues the Inquiry is investigating.       The evidence you'll be hearing may be commemorative of a person who has died, speaking about their lives, their aspirations, accomplishments and other matters.      It may also be about the impact a death and the experience that led up to it had on the person making the statement and others, such as family members and friends.

Chair, I know that you have carefully read and reviewed all of the commemorative and impact evidence, including the statements, photos and videos that have been provided to the Inquiry in the form that it was provided to the Inquiry in preparation for this hearing.

The Inquiry feels that it is of great importance to hear this evidence now, to begin to understand the nature and extent of the very many individual tragedies with which we're concerned and to be clear from the start that this Inquiry is about individuals, all with their own experiences.   This evidence is, therefore, different from the witness statements and other evidence that will be provided for our hearings next year which will be directly about the matters listed in the Terms of Reference, for example, about what happened on a particular ward at a particular time.

This hearing, this week and next week, serves a different but just as important function.    The evidence we will be hearing shortly will be candid, personal and loving but sometimes distressing and difficult to hear.   I would again like to remind people of the emotional support service that is available.     As we've heard, counsellors are present here today.      They have already shown themselves before, Chair, you came in but if they wouldn't mind putting their hands up again, wearing black lanyards at the back of the room here.     We want all those engaging with the Inquiry to feel safe and supported.

The Inquiry is deeply grateful for the commemorative and impact evidence.   As we said last week, we appreciate the courage it has taken to come forward with it.   It must have been very difficult indeed.    Our hope is that this will be a positive experience for those who provided the evidence, that it begins to recognise the enormity of their own experiences and that it marks the start of the path to change.

Some statements will be read over the next two weeks by those who made them, others will be read by me or by a legal representative.       We would like to ensure that people reading their own statements are made to feel as comfortable and supported as possible, and I would ask everyone attending to bear that in mind.      In some cases, over the next two weeks, those giving their own accounts may be accompanied at the table here while they do so.

We plan to break in the middle of the morning and in the middle of the afternoon.       The breaks will be a little longer than last week, they will be for half an hour, and we'll again have an hour over lunch.        It's possible that we'll take additional breaks from time to time if we need them.     There's no problem at all with that.     We have a flexible schedule to allow that to happen.

We'll be hearing commemorative and impact evidence Monday to Wednesday this week and again Monday to Wednesday next week, and there will be some further commemorative and impact evidence in our next hearing, which will run from 25 November to 5 December.

Thank you, Chair.

**The Chair**: Well, before we begin, can I say how grateful I am to everyone who has shared an account of a person who has died and the impact of that person's death. I've found these accounts deeply moving and affecting, and providing them, I know, must have been extremely difficult, but they do provide me and the rest of the Inquiry team with a very necessary perspective on the seriousness and the tragedy of the matters we're dealing with.

I want to reiterate Mr Griffin's point and give you my assurance that I have read every account that's been submitted in the form in which it was submitted, and I've looked at every photograph and I have viewed every video in its entirety.   If some parts of those accounts or some of the other material is not being shared in public today, I want to make quite clear that there is no disrespect meant but it is for very good reasons of either public safety or the need to ensure that we run the Inquiry in a proper and manageable sequence.   But I do want to make it clear that I've seen everything that has been submitted and none of it has been or will be overlooked.   Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Chair, with your permission, may I ask Patrick Brennan to come to the table here?   He will be reading his commemorative account about his son, Liam Brennan. And may I ask that the photograph is put up, please?

**The Chair**: When you're ready, Mr Brennan.

Statement by Patrick Brennan
----------------------------

**Mr Brennan**: Okay.   Thank you.

Good morning, Chair, and everyone involved in and attending this Inquiry.

My son, Liam Patrick Brennan was born on 10 August 1983 and was the eldest of three children. His birth at the Whittington Hospital in Archway was a moment of joy for us.       There was nothing unusual in his birth other than he was delivered by a male midwife which was then regarded as so novel that he'd been featured in an episode of Women's Hour on Radio 4 as a man doing what was regarded then as a woman's job.

His mum and I, who had been married for two years at the time lived in Barnet where Liam, his sister Lucy and brother James were brought up.       Liam attended the local Catholic primary school and went on to Finchley Catholic secondary school.     I think it's fair to say that Liam found his primary school to be fun, whilst looking back, secondary school was probably very restrictive to him. He found the necessary discipline and rigid structure of the school day, particularly when attending classes of subjects that didn't interest him, to be demotivating.

Liam had an open personality and whilst it was often obvious to some of his teachers that he had little time for their subject, it never led to personal dislike between them which was a credit to their professionalism and his engaging personality.

It is also fair to say that Liam was starting to struggle in his teens which can be a challenging time for any young person.    On the one hand he was a carefree and funny lad, on the other he could not work out his place in the world.     He was finding it difficult to define what he wanted to do with his life and his own self-worth -- a thing that unfortunately ran to the end of his life.    Responsibility did not sit comfortably with him but hard work on anything he was interested in did.

His rebelliousness increased and his behaviour became more difficult as he sought the friendship of those who he hoped had a better understanding of how he felt.     His relationship with his siblings in their words "became more complex" which they found difficult to understand as they were from the same family, had the "same life", but appeared to be on different paths.

Yet during his childhood we remember Liam playing football in the garden with his sister who was two years his junior.     James was born six years later.   They built dens, celebrated their birthdays with bouncy castle parties in the garden and holidays at Butlins, Pontins, Ireland and Corfu.   Upon returning from our holiday in Ireland, Liam used our tape recorder to recreate the programmes we had listened to on the local radio station when we were driving around enjoying what he saw as the relative simplicity of rural life in that country.    In those tapes, he was able to display his creativity, humour and sharp observation.

Liam and I shared a passion for sport in particular for supporting Chelsea as well as going to occasional matches at Barnet, and later on the odd game of snooker that always had to be played positively.   I remember in particular phoning Liam straight after the match when Chelsea won the Champions League final in 2012 to compare notes.   I was in Ireland at a family event, Liam watched it somewhere local to where he was living in Harlow.   He excitedly explained that he had watched the penalty shoot out through his fingers and that he could hardly watch it.   Over the call, his excitement and most of all his happiness was obvious.

Later that year, our last conversation took place when Liam rang me to check when Usain Bolt would be running in the 200 metres final of the Olympics.     Bolt was precisely the kind of top-class, apparently relaxed and unfazed sportsman that Liam would look up to.

Liam left school at 16.   Any further academic studies were not for him, so he worked for a while for a plumber, and then he had a brief job in a printing works.   He had done some work experience in a pizza parlour and appeared to enjoy it and eventually he had a series of chef jobs until he died.

Liam had a good relationship with my wife Susan, and I remember we went to visit him in 2000 at a gastro pub in Wales where he spent a few years as a chef and enjoying a rural life there at the time of the Sydney Olympics.   By all accounts, he was a creative chef and enjoyed the creativity and camaraderie of the kitchen despite its notoriously intense working environment. I know from conversations with Liam that he loved nothing more than having one of his recipes included as a "special" on the menu.

After the evening sessions, Liam found it difficult to wind down choosing to resort to alcohol and what he euphemistically termed "recreational drugs" to try to relax creating its own cycle of increasing dependency.

Even though Liam's hours were unsociable I remember us visiting him in later years at another pub/restaurant where he was working in Hertfordshire.   A local choir used it as their post practice watering hole and they treated us to a couple of songs.   That evening saw Liam at his most relaxed and content.   Liam joined us on Boxing Day lunches and took me once to Borough Market to be shown how to "shop like a chef" and he treated us to a meal prepared by him.       A bit of a busman's holiday but very much appreciated, nonetheless.

Liam just wanted to be happy, earn enough to fund a social life and live a relatively unhindered life. When he had money, he was incredibly generous with gifts he would give at Christmas.

Liam was not at all materialistic.

There were a lot of times when he achieved the equilibrium he was looking for but there were also times when he struggled with living.       Things just didn't make sense to him, he could not be persuaded to see the positive side of life.    He had talent, friends that enjoyed his company, the camaraderie of the kitchens that he worked in and the love and support of his family.

All that was never enough for him.

Liam died on Tuesday 14th August 2012, four days after his 29th birthday.

Liam had a throaty laugh that could easily be heard across the room, a wicked and sharp sense of humour, a love of sport, animals, music and computer games.

Anyone who met him, remembered him fondly.

In terms of the impact of his death on our family, it's been profound.

The first feeling is an almost overwhelming sense of failure, that we have outlived our child or sibling. This is against the natural order of life.

For us as parents, it is a basic duty to look after our children, set them up to make the best of life and watch them develop in our old age.   In that, there is a feeling we have failed Liam.

I should make it clear that whatever the outcome of this Inquiry, nothing will change that feeling.

In the couple of years after Liam's death I felt faced with an incompatible choice.   Not only was I, along with members of the family, trying to come to terms with my grief but also trying to get through the corporate defensiveness of the North Essex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust in a quest to understand how Liam had died, why he had died, what had been done for him and what had not -- all compounded by their contribution to the coroner’s hearing into Liam's death.   This was an incredibly difficult time and almost unbelievably made worse by the Trust.

Having got so far in my correspondence, discussions and meetings with the Trust, I felt I needed to make the choice between continuing to pursue more information about why Liam died which was beginning to feel all-consuming or to try to concentrate on supporting my family.     In feeling isolated, I chose the latter only to find out all these years later that so many others have found themselves in similar situations.

Our hearts go out to all the families involved in this Inquiry -- an inquiry from whom so much is expected.

Elaine, Liam's mum, is still frankly so impacted she cannot bring herself to articulate how she feels other than how much she loves Liam and misses him every day.

Lucy, Liam's sister, would point to impacts as simple as answering the question "how many siblings do you have?"    The issue is not to deny Liam was her brother, but having to deal, not only with the explanation, but also having to assuage the question's embarrassment or even judgment.    That is certainly an experience I can identify with and have had to wrestle with many times.

Liam will never meet Lucy's son who is now three years old.    I have no doubt he would have been a mischievous and generous uncle.

Lucy has been taken completely off guard when she sees Liam in her son's physical similarities and looks. There was a phase when they looked so alike, she had to say to her mum that he looks a lot like Liam at the moment and to prepare herself for that when she next visited them.     Whilst Lucy is happy to see him live on through our future generations it can be extremely hard and is a constant reminder that he is not here with us. She knows one day she is going to have to explain to her son why her uncle is an angel.

During Lucy's pregnancy, eight years after Liam's death, she was asked by a health visitor if she had suffered any depression.      Her answer was truthfully "no".   She was then asked why she was signed off work for two weeks in 2012 and whether it was due to depression.     Lucy then had to explain to the health visitor about her brother's death and to justify that she did not have a history of mental health issues. This was completely irrelevant to her pregnancy, and she made a complaint to her GP and health visitors organisation.     This was also handled completely insensitively.    Pregnancy should be a positive experience and yet the worst time of her life was being discussed when the two were not related.

Lucy also had to dig deep to trust the hospital with her own and her baby's health as the previous time she was in that particular hospital she was visiting her brother in the mental health facility and subsequently the mortuary.

For Lucy, there are practical impacts that she has to manage, including to maintain Liam's grave, supporting her parents and brother on hard days such as anniversaries, birthdays, Mother's Day and Father's Day. She will never forget thinking on her 30th birthday that she shouldn't have been the first child of Mum and Dad's to turn 30.   That was Liam's job.

For my part, the 14th August, Liam's anniversary, is very much a day in the diary when I cannot work or do anything that would involve personal enjoyment.     That would simply be disrespectful.     This is a day for going to his grave in Finchley.

James, Liam's younger brother, shares many of the feelings expressed by his sister and other members of the family.

It may be a cliché, but it feels as if Liam has been robbed of his potential as a person.     We did not feel that his condition was hopeless.     The good times gave us encouragement that with the right help and support, Liam could find his place in the world.     We were desperate for help which is why we turned to the NHS for the answers we could not find for ourselves.

No parents like us should have to bury their child, his hopes and dreams.

At family events there is always someone missing whether it be a wedding, his nephew's baptism, birthdays and many other excuses for getting together.        Our family and Liam himself have also missed out on whatever personal celebrations he might have enjoyed as he would have progressed through his life.      Since Liam's death our family get-togethers matter more and yet will always be enjoyed less than they should be.

Liam is always remembered; we hope he is always there in spirit casting his welcome shadow among us.

May Liam rest in peace.

Thank you.

**The Chair**: Mr Brennan, thank you very much indeed.

**Mr Griffin**: Can you take down the photo, please?    Thank you.

Chair, the next commemorative account will be read by Lisa Wolff, and if I can invite her to go to the table, please.      She will be talking about her daughter, Abbigail, Abbi.

**The Chair**: I should perhaps point out for anybody who is watching that I have a screen here, so I'm not missing anything that might be on the screen.

Statement by Lisa Wolff
-----------------------

**Ms Wolff**: Good morning, Chair.   It was really difficult listening to Mr Brennan speak so eloquently about his son.     It made me realise we're never going to be able to convey everything that we want to say about our children or our loved ones contained in what we bring with us. I think we've all tried our hardest.

And just for any absence of doubt, I was, I am and I always will be a loving mum to Abbigail Smith.    And this is addressed to Abbi herself.

Abbi, my daughter, you are a kaleidoscope of ever-changing colours and patterns.    My little kaleidoscope, I loved sharing the colours of your life with you.

I remember when you were born, I had already chosen your name years prior, it came from a book I read and I recalled the conscious decision to name my next daughter "Abbigail".   I thought it was the most beautiful name I had heard.   It suited you well; you were the baby that charmed everyone that you came into contact with and you were certainly adored by both your immediate and extended families.

When you were little we had the most fascinating conversations; I remember the time you asked me, "Is [my friend] poorly, Mum?    Does she have a bug in her tummy? Is it a spider or is it a ladybird!"    Or the fact that you struggled with some words -- escalators were "alligators", a dressing gown was a "dressing down" and ornaments were "ordaments".   You liked these words and chose to use them as you grew older and we often giggled about it with you insisting that you were correct!

In primary school, your fearlessness was legendary and despite your difficulties you still played an active role and were in the school nativity play every year. You developed a special bond with the teacher who was your one-to-one and you stayed in touch right up until the end.

You had such a special bond with animals.   I still have all your rosettes from the dog shows that we went to and the gymkhanas you won.   I remember you entering the beginners' showjumping class in 2006 and winning first place on Bambam, and I remember the same year you winning first place in "Best Child Handler" with Meg, our dog.

And I wanted to bring you all the rosette to show you that Abbi won, and on the back it says, "Abbi, 11 years old, on Bambam, August 06, Beginners' Show Jumping".

You wanted a dog of your own more than anything and despite never realising that dream, Greg and I have adopted a rescue dog for you.   His name is Ted and he is a stray street dog from Bosnia and, if anyone asks me, I tell them it is my youngest daughter's dog and that I am looking after him for her.   I tell Ted all about you and how lucky he is to have such an amazing owner who would simply adore him unreservedly.

You were always so sporty and I smile through tears at finding all your British Gymnastics awards for trampolining.   You attained all of the levels from 1 to 10 and I remember watching how free you looked when you were taking part.   When I took you rock-climbing, the instructor said to me that you were a natural at it and, again, you seemed so free.     The more adrenaline-inducing the activity, the more you seemed to revel in it.       You came alive at these times and lived for the moments of freedom that you could find.    You actively searched out these activities and were constantly chasing that next wave of emotion and life.    There was one week alone where you had me trying to arrange scuba diving, hot air ballooning and bungee jumping; I was tired just trying to arrange it all, never mind actually doing it! However, the sheer childlike delight you displayed when taking part in these activities always filled my heart with joy.

After we moved down south, we set out on our best life together and shared so many adventures.    There were lots of them but some of the memories that will always enable me to both smile and cry at the same time are:

Watching you at Adrenaline Quarry when you were on holiday in Cornwall.      You scaled and dived from about 40 foot up a rockface into the flooded quarry.        You swung out over 170 feet above the quarry on a zero gravity swing and reached over 40 miles per hour coming back down the zip line.

Going to Alton Towers together.    I had to get up at 5.00 am to get ready and drive us there.       It was only when I was there that I needed to go on all the rides too!    13 of them, Abbi!      And I had vertigo! Oblivion/the Smiler/13/Nemesis/Air/Rita.       The list went on.    I remember wobbling off the Smiler and needing to hold on to a tree to keep myself upright and I then remember being violently sick by that tree.         You stood there and laughed at me!        And after that I still needed to drive us home and I seem to remember you had the audacity to sleep most of the way!

You completed the Race for Life three times and earned over £1000 in sponsorship money.       On one run alone you raised over £700.        I would always stand in the crowd cheering and be waiting for you at the finish line.     You always crossed -- jubilant and delighted with yourself.     You were such a giving person.

And this is her medal from 2014 that Abbi wore and won.     And this one doesn't have a date on it.      Oh, does it?    2011, thank you.

I remember you meeting Greg, who was later to become your stepdad, for the first time and how much you liked him.    We settled into a routine and our little family was never more complete than when we did things like playing Disney Trivial Pursuit and other games together and when we took you out for meals.     I remember the day we took you to Cosmo and your complete delight at being able to choose anything and everything you wanted to eat.    More than anything, I remember your face when you saw the chocolate fountain and how you came back to the table for your camera.    You recorded your whole life through pictures and videos.     You stood and recorded the chocolate fountain on your camera, not caring who watched.    You always ended our visits together with such meaningful hugs; Greg always said that you gave the best hugs and held on so tightly.

Our movie days were legendary.   Sometimes we would go and spend all day in the cinema and bounce from movie to movie.     We would enter when it was light and go home when it was dark.     There were so many times we sat and watched DVDs at home together.     You had a collection of hundreds and hundreds of them.     I remember visiting you in one of the hospital units and turning up with a duvet, portable DVD player, DVDs, chocolate, popcorn and milkshakes.     We lay on the floor for hours under a duvet watching those movies.    I think one of them was Finding Nemo.

You were an accomplished horse rider.   Every week for years we would go together.   I would drive, no matter what the weather, and sit in the shed in the cold, usually wearing mittens and hat to try to keep warm and would watch on proudly whilst you rode the horses and enjoyed yourself.    Your magical bond with animals was always so evident at these times, you were always so absorbed in simply trying to be at one with the horse.   I always took the camera and sometimes filmed you or took a photo of you with all the different horses and I am so relieved I have all of those memories.    Even if I am not in the pictures, I know I was there.

You enjoyed watching soap operas such as Coronation Street, Eastenders and Casualty, Waterloo Road and Wentworth.   You used to be so worried if you came to stay with us that, even though you had set your Sky box to record them, you might miss them and so Greg and I had to double-record them at our house just for you, just to reassure you that you would be able to watch them!   You liked reality TV and deciding who to vote out on Strictly, I'm a Celebrity or Britain's Got Talent. You would always phone me straight afterwards and we would sit there and chat like two old ladies about who we wanted to stay and who we thought should be voted out.    And we always laughed about Greg thinking he was the best judge on the planet; he hadn't even watched these kinds of programmes until he met us!

You adored singing.    You created and uploaded so many tiktoks of yourself singing and had a Facebook group of "Good times" that included you singing. I think it brought you avenues to express yourself when you struggled to find the words.       We used to sing together so often and collapse in fits of giggles or we would wind the windows down of the car and sing on a summer's day, usually on our way to horse-riding or one of our days out.    We used to have singing competitions on the Wii until our voices were hoarse! All of your many friends would comment on your beautiful voice and now this is lost to them too.      I stay in touch with lots of them and they always talk about your kindness, gentleness and lovely voice.

On your 16th birthday I arranged to take you to London for the day.     We did so many things together.     We explored London, visiting the 4D cinema and we went on the London Eye.     I remember you being fascinated by the statue artist we met on the bridge and you had your photo taken with him; you had no idea that he had held a pretend gun to your head and were quite indignant when you looked at the photo when it was developed.   We sailed down the Thames and the captain allowed you to choose the seat you wanted and, with a big smile on your face, you chose the very top deck in the open air.     But the best bit of the day was surprising you with a trip to the theatre to see the Lion King.    I remember your horrified face at the cost of the sweets and the drinks but we still bought lots, along with the ice cream at the interval!   As we sat in the theatre, I looked across at you and you were enthralled.    As the actors and puppets started to enter the auditorium and make their way to the stage, I heard you exclaim "Wow" so loudly. And afterwards, when we chatted about the performance, you giggled about the fact that you thought you had said "Wow" in your head and didn't realise you had said it out loud.   But I am glad you did, Abbi, because I know it was a magical and memorable day for you and I was delighted to share it with you and to be able to carry that memory in my heart forever.

We sat for hour upon hour creating memory books together of all of our adventures.   They are littered with photos, tickets, postcards and cut-outs of all our special days.   I took a couple of them to the reception following your funeral so that all your friends, family and acquaintances, who were there from far and near, could see them -- your uncle had come all the way from the USA to celebrate your amazing technicolour life -- and they could look at those pictures and see some of the memories that I am standing here recalling with you.

I loved the way you created and kept your memories. This was how you processed and made sense of life: diaries, videos, cut-outs, quotes and lists.   You kept lists of everything.   Gifts that you had given people and presents that you had been bought.   I have found it all so carefully documented and lovingly stored with meticulous detail.   I have even found videos on your camera of you dropping various bath bombs into the bath at different times and filming them fizzing away into nothingness.   All of your letters and cards from people have been equally lovingly stored and kept safely.

I have read all of the diaries that you left and I promise you -- I'll just emphasise that -- I promise you that where you have expressed concern at all the things you have seen and been subject to, I will do my best to be your voice.   I was so happy when I found one of your diaries that recorded how you had made a ladybird and a Hungry Caterpillar ornament, (no, it's not an "ordament" -- I can hear you correcting me now and chuckling), you were so pleased that you still had them.   Well, I have found them, Abbi, and I promise that Greg and I will keep them safe forever too.

During your funeral, the celebrant made reference to your time at Columbus School and College and it gladdened my heart to see so many teachers and students present on the day, after all that time.   There are many more that sent me messages, Abbs, telling me how amazing you were, how much they learned from you and how they, like I, will carry your spirit of goodness with them. You had such a great time at Columbus and I remember some of the famous people you met: the Countess of Wessex, Frank Bruno, Shane Ritchie -- where we teased you about being Mrs Shane Ritchie because he called you "Blondie".   But your favourite encounter was with Jet, the Blue Peter pony.

You sailed round Britain on a schooner called the Queen Galadriel and I have photos and a video of you at the helm, steering the course true and holding her straight.    You visited the farm with the school weekly and you learned to surf on trips to the beach.    I have photos of you wading out into the sea at Clacton in your clothes and having to be brought home dripping wet.     How you enjoyed that day though -- I have pictures of you dancing on the beach with your arms open wide, laughing.

The staff at Columbus were so quick to talk about your empathy with other students, how much you cared, how much you gave of yourself.    You never had the opportunity or insight to realise how multifaceted and incredibly special you were.     All the many people who attended your funeral were there because of you, Abbi, you were the common denominator in that gathering.    You were such an old soul, a magical, gentle and incredibly loving and loved person and I wish you could have understood that.   I hope you are shining down on us, smiling in delight at so many people loving and caring about you.    I need to tell you, Abbs, it's only a fraction.    You touched so many lives.   Like a stone being thrown into the water, the ripples went far beyond your direct interactions.

Do you remember how much you looked forward to our barbecues?    I can picture you sitting in the sun, wearing your sunglasses and laughing with everyone. I can hear Greg saying to you, "Another burger, Abbs?" and you replying "oh -- go on then!" with a big grin. That was your standard reply on barbecue days, "Oh -- go on then!"

Something else that was standard for you -- pyjamas! You were a girl who loved her PJs and her dressing gown, and for this one time I will relent and call it "a dressing down".    You loved to feel comfortable and snuggly and I hope that you like the Tigger pyjamas we chose for you to wear at our final goodbye.    They said "BIG HUGS" and they felt right, comfy and cosy.

It breaks my heart, along with all the hearts of those who loved and cared for you, to think there will be no more memories, no more barbecues, no more movies, no more games and no more family.    It seems totally unfair that you had to die in order to be safe and at peace, when you should have been supported to achieve this when you were alive.   The saving grace is that at least now you are no longer a slave to the doctors and clinicians who never truly understood you and who fought to be right about their diagnosis and treatment of you; you are no longer a tool for their learning nor an inconvenience to their waking day.    No more will you be given countless drugs which stole your sparkle and took away your fabulous colours.

I wanted you to be in an appropriate facility that could offer you bespoke personalised care, appropriate for your diagnosis of autism, learning disabilities and mental health needs.

Perhaps you needed some medication but I always felt clinicians were trying to "fix" you with medication; no one wanted to know what you were like before the medications, and I believe some of your behaviours were simply your autism, but every behaviour was laid squarely at the door of mental health.

You became a mere shadow of the person I have so far described and I am still no closer to understanding how, over a period of ten years, you faded before our eyes following what was supposed to be a two-week assessment when you were simply a teenager.   This ultimately led to your death.    You took your life when you were only 26 years old, as you were stripped of support, empathy and understanding by those who were supposed to deliver those fundamentals.   You fought so hard and I wish beyond the stars that we had been able to find the support that you needed.    You had the majority of your life ahead of you and I desperately wanted to see how that panned out and to be able to share it with you. I feel cheated.

You have left a hole not just in my heart but in the hearts of a multitude of people that simply cannot be filled, not that we would want to, because the agonising pain serves as a continuous reminder that you are no longer here.

I wish that I were articulate enough to paint your particular kaleidoscope of colours inside every person's head here so that they could truly see, like those who love you, your individuality and the shifting facets of colours that danced along a rainbow's edge.     It may have been far too brief but I was privileged that you were my youngest daughter and beyond proud to have been your mum.

I still can't say goodbye as it hurts too much, but I will say that I love you lots, Pumpkin, which is the same way I ended our many, many phone calls.     I know you are safe, I know you are peaceful and I know that Rocky, your ever-present teddy who was with you for over 20 years, through thick and thin, is looking after you. I washed him and dressed him in his best clothes to be by your side in your coffin and to accompany you on your last journey.

I will miss you beyond eternity, as will Greg, your sister, your stepbrothers, your nephew and your niece, along with all your aunties and uncles and cousins and your many, many friends, who still stay in touch with me to this day!

How my daughter's death affected me is how this is titled and there isn't a day when it doesn't affect me, and it's something that I learn to live with and live alongside.    But it's something that will be with us forever.

I struggle to enjoy family events or gatherings because I am acutely aware that Abbi is absent from them and I am constantly thinking about how she is "missing out" because of how much she would have enjoyed the day. I, therefore, cannot relax and enjoy myself.

I find it difficult to watch my favourite TV programmes anymore.   If I watch Casualty or Silent Witness, I see Abbi's face on the cadavers being autopsied or the bodies being resuscitated and I am transported back to the day I identified her body.

I have surrounded myself with her belongings, her jewellery, her teddies, her furniture, even her vacuum cleaner and feather duster, just so that I can feel near to her when I'm doing my housework.

I had some of her clothes turned into memory bears and I've had four of them made for myself and the family.

I kept some of her clothes and wear them to feel closer to her.

When alone in the house, I speak to her and beg her to send me a signal to show that she is still with me or that she is "happy" wherever she is now.

I have kept Abbi's ashes.   I moved house recently and I even had a special bag that I used to sit with her on my knee for the whole journey and I held her tightly to make sure nothing further could hurt her.   I cannot drive alone on these occasions when she is with me and I insist my husband drives and that she travels on my knee.

I work for the NHS as a Social Prescriber and it can be tough trying to offer support to those who are bereaved and especially those bereaved by suicide. I have to disassociate myself as it is important that I simply listen and offer my patient appropriate support and not bring my experiences into the conversation.

I had to complete a basic life support course as part of my work and having to perform CPR on the mannequin was incredibly difficult.   I kept seeing her face and imagining what had happened the night she took her life and what had happened when she was discovered.

I still keep her on my "Find a Friend", a tracking app which would have allowed me to know her whereabouts, and I have her messages pinned on my phone so that I can see her picture every time I open my messages app.

I will never forget, never forget, having to identify her body.   I can still see the purple shroud that covered the mound that was to the right of my vision and knowing that I needed to turn my head and that that mound was Abbi's body.   I was not allowed to identify her body until after the autopsy as the police needed to rule out foul play.   It was five days before I got to see her.    The mortuary staff had to warn me "not to move her hair from round her neck" where they had wrapped her long blonde hair around her neck.

Whilst at the funeral parlour, Abbi's body continued to degrade and the funeral director had to phone me to ask permission to embalm her, and her hair was full of brambles and weeds.     She wouldn't have liked it that way.

I would like to show you four videos.   They illustrate clearly the fluctuating emotions that both Abbi and those of us who loved her had to live with. Three of the videos were taken from happy and lighthearted moments during her life.    The fourth was taken by Abbi whilst she was in hospital on 13 February 2022.     However, I have been asked not to show this final video as I understand that we had an undertaking by the Chair that it will be played at the evidential stage of this Inquiry.

Whilst I still don't fully understand this decision, I am respectful of it, even though this video is already in the public domain as it formed a part of the Dispatches documentary that was filmed and broadcast by Channel 4 last year.    Within 48 hours of recording this video, Abbi had taken her life.

**Mr Griffin**: Would you play the three videos, please?

*(Videos played)*

**Ms Wolff**: I also want to say that those three videos are taken with Abbi's niece and, as I recall, were less than two weeks before she took her life.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

Chair, we'll next be hearing Emma Harley's commemorative video about her brother, Terry White.      May I say this from Emma:

"Apologies for not attending today.     I lost my mother two weeks ago and I'm still not ready to be in the real world, let alone read my commemorative statement for my late brother, Terry.      It will be too painful for me to do this at the moment, and today, the 16th, is also the day of her funeral."

Could I, therefore, ask that Emma's video is played?

Statement by Emma Harley
------------------------

**Ms Harley**: My little bro, Terry.   Our little bro -- because this is for you too, James, our brother who also passed away as he couldn't cope living without you.     When you first came into my life, when I was four, I couldn't be prouder to be your big sister.     You were an awesome kid, so full of life and energy, everyone commented on your hair, bright blue eyes, and angelic face.      You really were the most beautiful little boy.     You attracted attention wherever you went.      You were into everything, a million miles an hour; the rest of us couldn't keep up.   Being with you was like being in a tornado, a bundle of joy and energy bursting with so much life, you couldn't get enough.     You were everyone's best friend and everyone wanted to be near you.

Your energy was infectious, you would drive all of us mad at home though.   There was no downtime with you. You loved so many things as a kid, horses, ice hockey, fishing, reptiles, dancing, music, your bike, DJing, birds of prey.   Maybe we should have been worried when you said you wanted to be a horse when you grew up.        We had years of horse impressions and saying, "That one's a beauty" whenever we saw a horse.    You never got into riding though, I guess there were too many other things to try, but you never stopped loving horses.    You had a thing about birds of prey too; your regular call when entering the house was to make bird of prey sounds just to let us know you were there.

You got measles when you were little, I can't remember it but it left you with glue ear.     It turned out you couldn't hear for a few years until you had grommets fitted.    We wondered why you couldn't say words properly.    It turns out you couldn't hear the words to learn to say them properly.    In fact these years of not hearing affected your learning at school and affected your self-esteem.    Coupled with dyslexia and undiagnosed ADHD, which wasn't a thing in the 80s, left you forming an opinion of yourself as not clever.   You were clever. Your ability to talk to anyone from any walk of life was astounding.   Your magnetism attracted all sorts.   Your warm, cheeky, smiley, slightly coy, giggly demeanour meant people just fell in love with you.   I wish you'd have felt this more and let this lift you up.   You were the sweetest, sweetest boy.

These were the things you loved doing as a child. You were brilliant at ice hockey.   The first time you went, people were amazed, it was like you had been skating for years.   You showed a natural talent for it and played until your late teens.   Getting up early on a Sunday morning proved to be too difficult for you as a teen, so I think that must have been when you stopped. You still kept all the gear though.   I think you were really proud of how good you were and we were proud of you too.

You loved fishing.   I had no idea how a little boy who couldn't sit still or be quiet could sit for hours, sometimes days, just staring into a lake and not moving. I never went with you as I had no interest but I knew your patience paid off and you'd often catch a whopper.

You and James, our big brother, did this together, and I know these were special times growing up for you both.     I think there must have been something about it that totally calmed your mind and let you escape.          Your brain worked so fast that it must have felt really good to you to slow it right down.

You loved dancing and putting on shows for us. Quite often we'd be sitting as a family watching TV and you would stand in front of the TV dancing and annoying the hell out of us, wanting attention, always wanting attention, and unable to keep still.     I would often help you set up a dance show where you would then invite all of your friends and charge them an entry fee.     Your entrepreneurial spirit was beginning to emerge.       We thought it was a cheek but somehow everyone wanted to come and everyone wanted to pay.     You had loads of mates coming to see you dance or DJ in the garage and you made a killing.    You also loved to set up little market stalls outside the house and would stay out there all day.     You managed to sell all of your old toys, books and games, often running in at the end of the day shouting, "I've made a hundred quid", amazing considering we lived in a cul-de-sac.     You were always an amazing salesman.    I don't really know how you did it.     It must have been that cute face and angelic hair.     But, no, it was because you were clever.    A word that you didn't think applied to you but it did.      Even as a young child, you were so quick with maths if it involved money.

It was always my job as big sister to keep you entertained and take you out.    We went all over the place with Chelmsford as our playground, all the parks, into town.    I loved taking you out and looking after you.     You on your bike with me running behind you, you always went too fast.    I'll never forgive myself for not watching you carefully enough one day.    You went too fast, went over the handlebars and landed on your face, knocking out one of your front teeth.    You were in so many scrapes as a child.     Even as a big kid you got yourself stuck in a toddler swing and the fire brigade had to come and cut you out.     Your friends found these scrapes hilarious while the rest of us would be pulling our hair out.     Getting into scrapes didn't ever stop, did it?

I have beautiful memories of you on holiday when we were little.    Kessingland was a holiday from hell for our parents, but we loved it, you being the star dancer at the kids' disco every night, head-banging so much you knocked yourself out on the stage, telling jokes on stage that didn't even make sense, but it didn't matter, you had an audience.    Majorca was perhaps the most memorable.    All week you went on and on about getting sweets and that inflatable red dolphin and had meltdowns galore, grinding our parents down so much they had to give in to you.     Your determination and persistence took over the whole holiday, Spanish waiters intervening to try and calm you down during tantrums, us playing restaurants every night with you as the waiter.

One of our favourite things to do together was recording JET Radio as kids.     "JET" stands for James, Emma and Terry.     I think you were Terry with the traffic and I was Emma with the weather.     James was, of course, the main presenter, and we even had our own jingle.

You were out and about all of the time and had so many friends.     You found it hard to stay in and there was too much life to be lived.     Teen years proved hard for you, hormones kicked in and ADHD symptoms became more challenging to deal with, although at the time we didn't know it was ADHD.     You didn't get a diagnosis until you were 16.

For years we knew there was something but we didn't have the terminology like "neurodiverse" or "attention deficit disorder".    There are too many tricky times to talk about here.    You started smoking weed, became vulnerable and easily led.     Your need to experience life to the fullest meant trying everything you could and this led down some tricky paths for you and for us as a family.

Despite testing us all to our limits, we never fell out.    We spoke on the phone a lot and remained close. You sought my advice and told me how much you loved me and were proud of me.     That's something I will never doubt, how much you loved me and respected me.

Thank you for always being so open with your feelings.     Knowing how much you loved me will give me strength forever.

James bore much of the brunt of your frustrations. The pair of you had a tumultuous relationship but deep down actually loved each other so much.    You take things out on the people you love the most.

You felt things very deeply and worried about a lot of things.    I remember you being so panicked by the war in Iraq when you were little, you couldn't stop worrying about it; as an adult, being deeply concerned about climate change to the point you had a panic attack while driving on the A13.

I know how feeling things so deeply can be debilitating at times, but it's also a gift.     It allowed you to show the world how big your heart was, nothing to hide.     You wore your heart on your sleeve.

You couldn't believe your luck in becoming a father to two beautiful daughters, you loved them deeply and I know how proud you were of them.     You kept every little drawing and gift they gave you, hundreds of little trinkets and drawings.    My boys will never forget what a fun uncle you were.     You had so much energy and time for them.   Football trips to the park and fun uncle stuff, rough and tumble and tickles.    It was like a madhouse with you around, and I would give anything to have you walk through the door again to play with them, and to clean my house.

When you lived with me for a while before I had the boys, my house was so clean.     I still think about how obsessed you were with cleanliness and symmetry when I'm doing the housework.   As a child you even had to have your own cutlery.    I realise all these years later it was your way of letting energy out and keeping yourself well: tidy house, tidy mind, et cetera.    I'm with you on that one.

You were such a grafter when you were well. I admired how much focus you had at times.    You worked so hard.    I remember watching you doing carpentry work like it was the only thing that mattered in the world.

The thing that sticks in my mind the most about you is how big your heart was.     You would give your right arm for anybody, going out of your way to help, telling people how important they were to you.     You made so many people feel special and loved and that's why there were hundreds of people at your funeral.    I wish you'd have known and felt that love.    Hundreds of people jumping up and down in a pub chanting your name, people who adored you because you were adorable.    You were a complete pain in the arse at times but everyone knew the real you and saw that big heart of yours.

There are so many things I can say here, so many memories.     You lost your way and you didn't get the help you needed.     Despite asking for help time and time again, the help just wasn't there.     You weren't well and it wasn't your fault.    How often in life you felt everything was your fault, that you were a bad person. If you'd have got the right help at the right time I wouldn't be here reading this out.    So gutted we never got to do our yoga retreat together.    I often think how that could have been life-changing for you.

You became so unwell you couldn't see a way out. You'd had several attempts to end your life before the final time.    Police would turn up and tell you to smoke a joint and calm down.    You'd end up in hospital to be discharged the following morning, despite calls from me and friends and partners explaining you were a danger to yourself and possibly others.    These calls fell on deaf ears.   You were found trying to jump off a building, to be arrested and then sent home.    Endless calls over the years seeking help, from you, me, friends, partners.        We didn't get anywhere.    Years of banging our heads against a brick wall.     A system not fit for purpose.   We were totally failed.

As your big sister, it was my job to look after you. I tried but I needed help, and it wasn't there, and it breaks my heart every day.     How I look back and can clearly see how it should have worked, what could have helped if people had listened, listened to you and listened to us.

James couldn't cope after losing you.     His drinking got worse, he was depressed and he became ill.     As a paramedic he knew he should have gone to hospital when the ambulance came but he refused.    He died a few days later of a cardiac arrest.     Over the last few years, since losing you, James kept telling me how his heart was broken and now he is gone too.

I have now lost two brothers.     My nieces have lost their fathers.    Your daughters have to grow up without a father, your friends without their best mate, because you were everybody's best mate, my sons without their uncle; cousins, uncles, aunts, nieces, so many people affected.

It's not easy for me to live life expecting those close to you to die suddenly, worrying that those around you will become unwell and take their own lives, checking that everyone is okay to the point where the worry is replaced by numbness, a wound that will never fully heal.

It would not have been easy for you to constantly think about death and suicide, especially your last few hours and what you went through.    Why didn't you call me?   It's taken lots of therapy and group therapy to sit here today and read this without breaking down.     I can't begin to describe the many ways your suicide has affected me and continues to affect me every day.     Not just me, a lot of people have been seriously affected by your death.    There has been a lot of pain and a lot of trauma.

Your death could have been prevented.   I will never forget your last time in hospital after a failed attempt.    You were begging staff not to discharge you because you would go home and try again.      I stayed on the phone and told you to stay there if you felt unsafe. I heard the receptionist say to you, "As I've already told you, sir, there's nothing more we can do for you. If you don't leave, I'll call security".      For me, this sums up the attitude that you faced the whole time you begged for help.   I'm sorry.

You took your life on 14 April 2019.      You had been found hanging at your home.       At the time you'd been under the care of Essex Partnership Mental Health Services Foundation Trust.       To all the people listening and to those in charge today, please don't let these words fall on deaf ears.        We're all here today because we know the system needs real, long-lasting, drastic change, so let's keep fighting to make that happen and to save lives.

**Mr Griffin**: Would you play the remaining photographs, please?

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: I believe that's the last of the photographs.

Chair, we're very grateful for Emma's video and we wish her the very best today.

Chair, that is the time at which I suggest we take a break.    May I suggest just under half an hour and that we reconvene at 11.45.     Thank you.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

*(11.17 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(11.49 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, the next account we hear will be via videolink.    You have moved so that you have a line of sight of the screen.      The account will be from Suzanne Sutcliffe and she'll be speaking about her brother James Hulton or Jim.

Suzanne, thank you very much for joining us this morning.     If at any time you want a pause or a break, do just let me know, otherwise we're very interested to hear what you have to say.

Can you hear me all right?         I think there may be a difficulty with her hearing me.        Can you hear me now?

**Ms Sutcliffe**: Hello.

**Mr Griffin**: Hello, can you hear us?

**Ms Sutcliffe**: I can hear you now.

**Mr Griffin**: Suzanne, did you hear anything else that I said?

**Ms Sutcliffe**: Sorry?

**Mr Griffin**: Did you hear any of my introduction?

**Ms Sutcliffe**: I'm so sorry, the sound quality is as it was in the test.    I can't hear what you're saying.

**Mr Griffin**: Can we improve the sound quality, please?

Suzanne, we can hear you well, if you give your account, we will listen with care.

**Ms Sutcliffe**: I'm so sorry, I can't make out a word that you're saying.

**Mr Griffin**: Can a communication be given to her to start her account, please?

**Ms Sutcliffe**: I'm happy to begin if you can hear me clearly.   I just can't hear your room or anything that's being said at your end, I'm sorry.

Right, I'll begin, thank you.

Statement by Suzanne Sutcliffe
------------------------------

**Ms Sutcliffe**: Okay.    So this is my commemorative statement in relation to my brother James.   Can you hear me clearly? Yes, thank you.

I'd just like to begin by offering my family's condolences to all of the other families affected as we have been and to specifically thank Melanie for the mother lioness that she is and has been.

My brother James was born on 13 May 1977 at Thameside General Hospital in Ashton.   We're up north and he was born up north.   He was healthy, bouncing, bubbly, at 8 pounds and 15 ounces.   He also reached all of his average milestones and was an inquisitive happy child.

When he died, some 42 and a half years later, he was a cherished son, partner, daddy of three, brother, brother-in-law, son-in-law, uncle and friend to many. In his memory, I can say a couple of words which came straight from him that I recall from the many weeks where he discussed his imminent death with me.    He pleaded with me to remember him "not now but how I was". He told me to please make sure that his partner, "my kids and Mum and Dad all know how much I loved them". He asked me to please keep being involved "in my kids' lives".   And he acknowledged that he had good friends. He says, "I have good friends and know that people do seem to like me".    I take great comfort in carrying his legacy forward and knowing that he knew he was loved.

This is a difficult piece to write because my parents, my sister-in-law and James' children are each in too much pain to articulate their memories and feelings in this way.    Our lives have quite literally been torn apart and there will forever be a before and after for each of us now.    Every photograph, life event, video or Facebook Timehop, those images go into the pre- or post-21 February 2020 parts of our brains.

I was James' older sister, his only sibling, two years older.   Late in life he liked to be known as Jim by everybody, including me.    Mum and Dad continued to call him James.     As children, we had a really, really happy childhood, so thanks for that, Mum and Dad, from both of us.    We spent time with our parents and extended family, mainly our maternal grandparents with whom we were really close and spent a great deal of time.     We would make tents from their laundry dryer, play dress-up and walk miles with our grandad, my mum's dad.    He'd split a giant bar of Dairy Milk between us when we reached our destination on walks.    We used to laugh as adults about the way he did this with his fingernail to ensure a completely equal split.    I remember walks where our grandad would just venture across fields without footpaths, having angry golfers and farmers chasing us. As a family we did lots together.    We enjoyed annual family trips to a cottage in Anglesea and coach trips to Eurocamp destinations.   I remember each of these with great fondness.   We made friends with other kids and felt so free camping in wood- and beach-type destinations.

James, or Jim, could be shy as a child but together we gave each other confidence.   Mum and Dad still have his first photograph sitting on the plush velvet chair that they used to drag around schools around here in the early 80s and 90s.   He had such a close bond with his key worker at nursery that he had his photograph taken actually sitting on her knee.    He had a shock of shiny light red hair, which my mum keeps the locks from in his first ever haircut in a special locket.

When James reached primary school he became interested in chess, he joined a club, often participating at regional level, and he continued to excel at art and make friends.     He loved fishing with Dad, and due to Dad's trade as a toolmaker, James learnt loads of skills around carpentry and other areas.      We moved when he was ten to a really rural area and he caught, prepared and cut fish for us to eat, and my parents remember how proud he and in turn they were.

As he grew, there wasn't anything he couldn't really put his hand to, even though IT became his chosen career path after a while.     He once built a PC for his eldest son from bits of IT equipment he found in a skip of all places.    When he was ten, Dad stopped smoking and saved for his first Commodore 64 computer.    He was elated and became really excited about beginning computer programming, which he was great at and really excelled in.

He continued to make friends in senior school.     He was popular and adventurous with an active social life and we were really close.     As a big sister, I suppose I always felt a little bit maternal in some ways. I defended and protected him and helped him with Mum and Dad when his behaviour was typically teenagerish.        We both loved rap music and R&B.     He was really handy.        On one occasion he completely refurbished his room building a sofa from scratch, which he then went on to upholster, and inserted fish tanks in the arms with neon tetra fish and bright lights.

He loved cars.   As a teenager, I vividly remember him and my dad taking his Vauxhall Nova to pieces on the driveway.    I'm sure the neighbours loved us.   He literally took out the engine and put a new one in.        He was always able to do that stuff with help and mentoring from Dad.    They were really close and he soaked up the knowledge that Dad shared.     People around us could never believe what he could achieve.     Later he even sold pieces of art, drawing a picture upon request of a family friend's mill, which was hung in pride of place in the centre of the place.

When he was around 17, Jim experienced sudden onset anxiety and there were times when this became really debilitating and I was really worried for him.     We spent loads of time together.     I sourced him some counselling and we got through it together just by talking and talking and providing reassurance constantly.     However, that didn't work in the time leading up to his death. At that time, in early 2020, we could all get through to him, but by the time he would go to sleep and wake up, by the morning his symptoms were back with an absolute vengeance.   He had no peace.

James met the mother of his daughter through friends who were at the same university as she was and they lived together for a while up north.     When he was 25, she found that she was pregnant, and his daughter, my incredibly beautiful niece, was born in October 2001. After a short separation, they decided to make a go of things in the south of the country and they moved down there to be close to her family.    They reconciled for a short time.    When they later split, James made the decision to stay down there to enable him to have joint custody and co-parent my niece.    This remained the case until he died, and this is something I'm very proud of him for doing.

Mum and Dad were concerned that he was to become a young father but they were so proud of him for stepping up to the mark.    They were so proud of him for stepping up to the mark and excelling as a brilliant father which continued with his two sons.    He and his daughter remained extremely close right up to the day of his death and enjoyed time out together.    They bonded over music nights, drinking long island iced teas when she was of age.    Their relationship evolved like that as she grew.   She is also incredibly creative and artistic, just like him, and they both love music which was a shared interest.

She comments now about his sudden uptake of random habits such as Warhammer figure painting and building fish tanks again from scratch.     She recalls him placing objects on the kitchen table to draw with him watching her.    One day, for example, he just decided to buy multiple camper van build magazines which was to be his latest project.

As he grew older, Mum and Dad were always impressed by his massive skill set.      He was a ... (audio broken).

**Mr Griffin**: Suzanne, if you can hear me, could you pause? We lost volume just for about ten seconds?    Could you go back a sentence or two?

**Ms Sutcliffe**: Okay.   Excuse me, I've a frog in my throat suddenly.

Mum and Dad remember how much he helped them on visits to their home in Wales, designing and building their garden, helping Dad with mechanics and bringing them plants he had sourced.    Mum's favourite is an acer tree which began life as a twig but now continues to flourish in their beautiful garden.    Dad bought a small boat and James enjoyed being out on the Conwy Estuary with him.    In his younger years he worked as a TV salesman, graphic design sign writer and later in a Revenue and Benefits team.     He even sold clothes for a while and definitely had some entrepreneurial tendencies.

In 2009, James/Jim, met his life partner when they worked together.     They later formed a relationship, moving in together.     She gave birth to their first son in 2011 and their second, my little nephew, in 2015. They were a wonderful family and they enjoyed a wonderful happy family life together.   Jim continued to share his creativity with his sons, creating board games, which they still have, teaching them to ride bikes, rejoicing in their progress and their reaching milestones.   He worked condensed hours to become more involved in childcare, continuing with shared care of my niece, his daughter.   All of the siblings grew up with close bonds, something he worked hard towards, and they spent quality time together.   He enjoyed gaming, creating, building, weight-training, kayaking, and the list goes on.

James and his partner moved to a property with a large garden.    He built a large log cabin in the garden from double-glazed windows that couldn't be used, given to him by a business, and with timber he bought. He built a home gym inside there.   He and his life partner enjoyed a huge circle of friends and regularly socialised, enjoying a great relationship together.

Within their relationship, I saw so much fun and love for each other.   They were, of course, different people but I think they just clicked from the time they first met.    Even though Jim's fear of flying was a little restrictive, they enjoyed family holidays together.

In early relationships, I was often quite envious of it when I looked at theirs, I loved the relationship they had together.   They enjoyed barbecues and nights out with friends, bike rides with the boys.     Jim's life partner has an extensive family and he was invited in with open arms and they were all incredibly close, and we have lots of photographs of them together.    I stayed in touch with them because, in addition to being the family of my sister-in-law, who I love very much, they were a massive part of my brother's world, in both sickness and in health.     I'm forever grateful for that and for his mum-in-law on that side and everything that she did.

My brother's partner's brother began kayaking with him and they really loved each other's company, spending special days together.    They holidayed to Italy when his partner's brother got married there.    They had so many happy days that he talked about to me and they shared photographs of.   And, again, his partner's mum, who I love to pieces, played a massive role in his life, particularly when he was so ill.

Jim's illness meant that his partner became effectively his full-time carer which tore her life and that of her boys, my nephews, apart.    My eldest nephew spent part of his birthday week visiting his dad in hospital in a mental health unit.

When home, his partner couldn't leave him alone. She had to organise someone to take care of him if she had to go out.   She remains completely traumatised by his illness, his death and all of the circumstances surrounding this.

From October of 2019 until the date of his death in February 2020, caring for Jim in his illness was a full-time role, including round-the-clock conversations about him taking his own life, which only increased towards his inpatient stay.   The level of intensity of care took an immeasurable toll upon her. I can only describe what I saw and what I still see as physical and mental agony and trauma.

James journeyed up to my parents' home just prior to his illness with a close friend to use as a base to explore Snowden, as they live in Wales.   We regularly look at photographs as a family of him hiking and a video of him diving and swimming with a dog, just a random dog.    They're precious snapshots of a life cut tragically and totally avoidably short.   Sometimes I can watch them, others I can't.   Sometimes they just feel like a memory of a memory, and other times the pain cuts too deep to endure.   I finally understand the meaning of "gut-wrenching" to describe pain.

On the last birthday of my mum's before he died -- there's a typo of mine, apologies -- before he died, James travelled up to see her and took her for afternoon tea as a surprise.   While tucking into sandwiches, he said he hadn't bought her a card because he thought the best thing he could get for her was to spend quality time together.   This touched my mum enormously and she's emotional now remembering it.   Nothing can ever prepare you -- I can't even imagine as a mother myself -- nothing can ever prepare you for burying your own son, particularly in such extreme circumstances after such a short illness.   They will never get over it.

Our last family holiday was a coach trip to Wales in June 2019 where James' family, mine, Mum and Dad enjoyed a fantastic time together.   The kids played and played, and he and his partner made lots of new friends and socialised.   Just had our niece missing.   When I look back at pictures now, it's almost impossible to believe that less than eight months later he was dead.

My brother was my best friend and confidante.     We always talked about how similar our psyches were and how well we understood each other's minds.   Throughout his adult life, until it was cut so desperately short, I continued to feel like I wanted to protect him and put anything I could right for him in any situation.    Other than his partner, I feel like me and Mum were the first people thereafter that he reached out to when he was troubled or anxious or just struggling with general life stuff.   I feel very envious now of some people around me with siblings, particularly when they're not close, because he was my only sibling and I loved him to the ends of the earth.

When he became ill in October before he died, I drove down late at night to bring him to my home in the north west of the country to nurture and care for him and to access emergency support at A&E.    I knew he was experiencing intrusive thoughts, pure OCD symptoms, extremely heightened anxiety, which worsened significantly in the morning.   In the end, he didn't sleep.   He dropped massively in weight, around two stone.   He didn't care about anything, including his appearance.   He was numb.   The short time when he was at my home, which was incomparable to the time his partner cared for him, I slept top to tail with him in my bed and he would wake having night terrors and need to be talked down.   It was frightening and traumatic, and his partner had this for weeks and weeks and weeks.

His emotions were so dampened and his thoughts so terrifying that what began as intrusive thoughts about suicide became his real-time fixation, but nobody would listen to me, nobody.   The reason I have never felt angry about him taking his own life is that in my lifetime no trauma that I've ever experienced, including losing Jim, has been more terrifying, intolerable and agonising than the pain I myself experienced with similar health conditions in my early 20s, except I survived and he didn't.

In his final days in the hospital, he experienced so much trauma that it was hard to hear and we're all scarred forever by that.     I spent hours on the phone with my sister-in-law throughout this time, nothing seemed to be happening, no real treatment.    It was impossible to get through on the telephone.    We couldn't be entirely convinced about his medication.    I'll always remember my mum sending him the song, "I can see clearly now the rain has gone", and he messaged her to say he had gone to sleep to that, and now, upon reflection, I find that heart-breaking.

For me and my little family, partner and two young children, the day he died I was travelling down to visit him in the hospital.    On the way down, my brother's partner rang to say that someone had jumped from a bridge close to their home.    I was driving -- I'm a nervous passenger, I always drive, otherwise I'm a nightmare -- my husband had the phone, so we both reassured her, "No, don't worry, Jim's safe, he's in hospital."   I didn't think anymore of it.   She commented that she'd never heard of anyone jumping from there and she was really worried, and we all knew that that was somewhere he'd named as somewhere he'd considered taking his own life, that particular location.

Soon the traffic began to back up and it took four hours to get through it.    At the time I remember winding down the window in a queue because we were all stationary and someone told me that the main road through Essex had been closed and that someone had jumped.    I remember appeasing the kids, so they didn't really hear that, and commenting to my husband that this was an even bigger reason for us to all be grateful because my brother was an inpatient now and how awful that must be for the deceased's family.

We arrived at Jim's home address at half six in the evening.   I rang him to say we were nearly there, that we'd dump our stuff before running straight back out to drive to see him, and that obviously went to answer phone.    I left a message.   I didn't know he'd already died four hours ago.

Upon arrival at his home, his partner again expressed concern and we ran upstairs together eventually reaching the ward after ages on hold, lots of different calls.   And just as they said, "No, we discharged him at half past one", the police car pulled up outside the window.    I ran out and asked, "Is it my brother, and is he dead?"    His partner was screaming hysterically and my husband was holding her.    My husband was great friends with my brother and took his death really hard.   He'd spent a lot of time on calls, during his illness as an inpatient and when he stayed with us.

My hubby took all the kids upstairs, my two, my brother's two.   The police wasn't great, demanding to come in for a DNA ID check, but his partner was literally on her knees.     I will never forget her screams and, later, I will never forget the scream of my eldest nephew as his mum told him, when all of her family arrived, that his daddy had died and he'd never come home.   His youngest son was too little to even process this.   How do you comprehend that your daddy, you saw him just a day ago, has gone forever?

I don't to this day remember ringing my mum and dad to tell them but apparently it was Mum that I told, she answered the phone.   She was in a state of collapse because she'd spoken to him just hours earlier.     She thought I was calling from the hospital to update them. Dad took the phone from her.       And then I do vividly remember telling my niece, who was away, and she arrived at the house shortly thereafter completely broken.         And I then rang his best friend and everyone else.      It was hideous.    I couldn't even cry.    When I went back into the house, his partner was vomiting.      It was like a physical outpouring of trauma, grief, agony.      It carried on for hours and hours.

My mum and dad travelled down the next day, their pain unimaginable, the whole situation was agonising and uncontrollable.    I felt so powerless.    I'll never forget us all huddled in Jim and his partner's bedroom, being given information by a not-great family liaison officer and my mum's teeth audibly and uncontrollably chattering together.    His books and his trainers were still just next to the bed.

Speaking from my own perspective, I will never get over this, despite counselling, medication and a strong support network.   The pain is acute.     Even though it softens from the very initial weeks, it worsens in other ways, because at least when it's raw I can think that I only saw him a couple of weeks ago.      Now it has been four and a half years since I saw or spoke to my beloved brother, and that in itself is painful.      Survival mode means you have to block, block and block or you could never carry on.    In some ways my bedroom is like a shrine.     I have his cap on my bedhead with a feather bauble with his name on, pictures of him as a child and with my kids and his.     A candle that I light with a glass rainbow, the rainbow is how I try to convert the thought of the bridge that stuck in my head where his life ended.     I try to imagine he was caught on his way down to the ground in some spiritual way, maybe by my grandad, who I mentioned earlier, with whom he was so close, maybe he just caught him in his arms.    The alternative that we have had to endure of the way he died and the graphic description of what that looked like, some of that inaccurate from various parties, will never ever leave me.    The only way to deal with it is to block it out.     It's like I can't even see it, even though I didn't see it -- sorry, it's like I can see it even though I didn't visually see it.

For a while I became fixated irrationally on seeing the police officer's bodycam footage.    However, I stopped myself from pursuing this.     But it was an agonisingly strange feeling to have shared his every waking thought, including his suicidal thoughts, to then be cut out of the way in those final moments when his life ended.     It was like I wanted to share in that, to be with him to the end.

I regularly have a vision that pops into my head of me running towards him at the point when he took his life and getting him into some type of bear hug.    It's like trying to replace that image.   I know that his partner has watched CCTV of certain elements and how agonising that was for her.   We still have so many unanswered questions or insensitively dealt with questions which fuels trauma and grief.

At his funeral hundreds of people came, coaches were organised.   The eulogy was funny because he was. I couldn't cry, it was the beginning of my journey, as this is a continuation, to hold everything together like I promised him.

His work colleagues went out to toast him shortly after his death and they told me, "Last night was nice, a lot of people came from all the teams Jim had worked in.   There was a lot of love for him and kindness.    We did get comfort.   So many people have a gap in their life left by him and they want to remember him as the cheeky chap he was and how he always had kind words for them when they needed it."

Personally, as Jim's sister, I won't ever get his words out of my head or his legacy and my part in that. His kids lost their dad, they were just four, nine and 18.   His partner was just 34 years old.   My parents lost their son, they buried their son.         We will never properly heal.       He was a person.    He had so much more to do to achieve and to live for.          I can still hear his booming northern accent when we met up, "All right, Sue", and giving me a big bear hug.

Sometimes I just say over and over in my head when the bad stuff comes in, I say to myself, "We will meet again."     I'm not sure what I believe and more so because I can't ever accept that we won't meet again.

Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you so much for your account.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we're now going to move to a further account and I know you may want to move back to your other seat.

We will now hear from Samantha Cook.     She will be giving her commemorative account about her sister, Paula Parretti.     Could you please put up the photograph?

Statement by Samantha Cook
--------------------------

**Ms Cook**: My sister, Paula, was more than just her mental health.     She was a daughter, a sister, an aunty and a friend.

She was nine years older than me, and I'm not going to lie, sometimes it created a bit of friction, but she was always there to protect me.        She would get her friends, who were a couple of years younger, to look out for me at school if I was getting bullied or hide me under the bed if there were serious problems at home.

Being much younger, I didn't quite understand mental health and, to be honest, I don't think she understood it herself.    But as I got slightly older, we both started understanding it and our relationship became better than ever.

I started to understand that when she was struggling, sometimes she would verbally lash out, and this understanding made it possible for me to sit and talk to her about it and she started doing the same. This made our bond so strong.    My mum, Paula and I would call ourselves the three musketeers.    It was us against the world.

Paula would reach out to me, my mum or her best friends if she was struggling, and these conversations would always end up in laughter.     And what a laugh she had!     More of a contagious mischievous giggle!

I had to drive past her flat on the way to and from work so I would pick her up on my way home, bring her back to mine and her mood instantly lifted, especially when she saw my children.     We used to all like going to a quiet little beach together.     More often than not, I would pick her up and she would be wearing the same shorts and T-shirt as my little son, although we had no idea how this happened!

She was a fantastic aunty, the total definition of "the fun aunt", and she was so proud of her niece and nephews.   She would sing and dance with them, play games and quite happily buy them the noisiest toys she could and just sit back and chuckle.

I miss being able to sit there with Paula, rum in hand, singing our heads off to a bit of Fleetwood Mac, laughing till the tears ran down our cheeks.

Very shortly after Paula passed away, I was blessed with the most beautiful granddaughter and I now know I've got a grandson on the way as well.   I was so proud but at the same time that special moment was clouded by the heartbreak that Paula didn't get to meet her and become a Great Aunty.

Our lives changed forever on the day she died, 6th January 2022, and the last image I have of her is burnt into me.

I had taken a day off work which is something I normally never do.    However, I was so busy trying to take care of my sister -- I was trying to get her help in the weeks leading up to it -- taking care of my mum, the children and working full-time, it wore me down and I'd just become ill.

On my day off, I slept in, also something I never normally do, but I was so tired that I ended up sleeping longer and I missed a phone call and missed a text from Paula.     The text from Paula said, "thank u for being part of my life".     I sensed something was wrong.    I had a spare key to Paula's house.    I went straight to hers, waited for her friend to meet me there and then walked into her house.     She'd hung herself.

This last image of Paula is what I see whenever I think of her, instead of the happy memories.    My children talk about her all the time with all the funny memories, but then I catch that glimpse in my mum's eye of sadness and helplessness and I get this overwhelming feeling that she could still be here if she just got the help she begged for.

As a result of what happened to Paula, I now can't watch certain TV shows if it has something to do with someone hanging themselves.     Christmas and New Year is now messed up due to when Paula passed away, 6 January, and my mental health has completely deteriorated. I hide myself away during Christmas and New Year and just try to avoid people, but it's taken its toll on the relationship with people in my life.

**Mr Griffin**: Can we put up the remaining photographs, please?

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

Chair, that's it for this morning.     We'll reconvene at 2 o'clock so we have a slightly longer lunch than normal.    We're very grateful to all of those from whom we've heard this morning.

**The Chair**: Thank you everybody very much indeed.

*(12.24 pm)*

*(The short adjournment)*

*(2.00 pm)*

*(Proceedings delayed)*

*(2.10 pm)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, the next commemorative account will be given by Wendy Porter about her husband, Darren Porter.

**The Chair**: Mrs Porter.

Statement by Wendy Porter
-------------------------

**Mrs Porter**: Darren and I met in 2016 and 2017, we met at a low secure hospital, we both met as carers, we just kept on texting each other.   Darren was a very kind-hearted and helpful person.      We decided to secretly get married on 2 May 2019 in Gretna Green.      Only Darren and I were present.

Darren was 40 when he married me, he was a young man recently married, he had everything to look forward to. He was looking forward to a life with me, watching his children from a previous relationship grow up, with another two children he took on responsibility of looking after.

When we met, we were so excited about living a full life together.    Although there were plenty of challenges ahead, Darren always tried his best to make sure he made time for the children.    He was always thinking of activities for the children to do with him, making sure that the younger children did not get bored or feel left out.    We all went to the zoo and parks.   He always made sure that he bought plenty of arts stuff for the children.     We would go for long walks with the children. He tried to keep everyone happy.

Darren loved his cars.   He would spend hours tinkering, mending or helping others out with their cars.     He would get so much joy from spending time in this way.     He loved his old vintage mini.   He even invested in one himself so he could tinker with it at the weekends.     Darren loved his camper van so we could escape in it as a family, enjoying the time with his children camping.

Darren used to work as a carer but wanted to get into something else, so he trained as a bus driver, which he enjoyed, allowing him to try something different as a job.   He was working with a company called Panther Travel as a bus driver.    A local school hired him as a bus driver to take the children to Harry Potter World which meant he got a free ticket to Harry Potter World through his job, which he enjoyed.

When we first met, I could see Darren was a kind and considerate person.   However, I could also see many challenges he faced due to his own mental health concerns.   He struggled through as best he could.

The Covid pandemic hit Darren hard due to travelling restrictions.   It prevented him from spending time with his children in the way he'd like to.    Darren's mental health deteriorated to the point that he took his own life.   His mood was low.   He tried to keep this from me. He would not talk to me about what his problem was.      He would often be in the back garden on a chair crying. His mental health struggles were such a problem for him that he simply could not deal with it.    He could not focus on work, home or family life.   Due to his mental health condition, he became more and more paranoid, which put an enormous strain on my family.   We tried to get help from the mental health professionals.    We put our trust in these professionals.   As we did not know the system and how it worked, we put our trust in them. However, we were gravely let down as these professionals did not appreciate the urgency of this situation, so Darren was left with the demons to take over his thoughts and we as a family were left to deal with the consequences of this, which at times was extremely scary.

Sadly, on the day Darren died, Darren saw an opportunity whilst I was at work to take his own life. He saw no other way out of constant and immense suffering caused by the deterioration of his mental health.    My daughter was the one who found him.   It is not difficult to understand the impact this has had on my daughter.   When Darren passed away, I was lost.   I no longer had someone by my side.     It was hard to carry on. I took time off work and tried to busy myself at home. I did not want contact with anyone.    I had to keep my emotions in check and not let the children see I was crying.    My priority was them.

I found a quiet space on the pier and bought a padlock and put the relevant information on it.     I sat on the pier with the flowers I bought him and just talked to him.   People passing me must have wondered why I was talking to a padlock.   For me, it was a type of release.   I did not want my children to see me not being in control.

Darren was the first person who I had met who'd actually made time for me, making me feel special. I was no longer just a mum, and that's why I adored and loved him so much.     When I lost him, I didn't just lose my husband, I lost my friend.

We still struggle to understand why this has happened, struggle with the fact that we put our trust in professionals who knew more than us, and struggle knowing that Darren was greatly let down.    He passed away at the age of 41, a loss of a young life, a loss of the life that we were meant to have together.

**Mr Griffin**: Please put up the remaining photos, please.

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last photo.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much, Mrs Porter.   I know that is very difficult, but I'm very, very grateful.     Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: We will now be hearing from Amanda Cook so I invite her to come to the table.     She will read her commemorative account about her brother, Glenn Holmes.

Statement by Amanda Cook
------------------------

**Ms Cook**: My brother, Glenn Holmes, died at the very young age of 19, 19 with what would have been a whole exciting, adventure-filled, loving life ahead of him.

Glenn, without putting him on a pedestal, was genuinely a caring, loving, funny, smart and interesting young man who desperately wanted help to deal with his mental health problems.      When Glenn was a child, he was very hyperactive and playful, so much so our mother tried to have him seen by a GP and assessed for ADHD but nothing every came of it.

Glenn would enjoy his computer games and loved to joke around with his friends and family, and absolutely loved being around animals.     If Glenn ever saw or heard anyone in trouble, he was there to protect them, putting their safety above his own.

Glenn's problems started when he was a young teen. He experienced temper problems, which he received help for at secondary school, but as soon as he completed his years in education, he was left without any help.      Glenn turned to the NHS for guidance for his mental health problems, was put on all sorts of different medication, then sent on his way.   He pleaded with doctors to help him find a way with coping.     He told them how he thought of harming himself, thoughts of taking his own life, yet when visiting him during a stay at the Lakes, which is under the care of the Essex Partnership University Trust in Colchester, I was told Glenn was only artificially hurting himself, that he was attention-seeking and it was best not to give him the attention and leave him to it, which my parents did.

Events leading up to Glenn's death.     Soon after he had been discharged by The Lakes Glenn was told by the crisis team that he was calling them too much, and they offered him insufficient help.     They left him alone, panicking and scared and seeing no way out.       My brother took his own life on 7 July 2012 at 19 years old.

Glenn would possibly by now, with the right help, have his own family.    He loved children.      He was kind and playful with his nephews who he adored.        He has missed out.     I have missed out on seeing him play with my own two children who he sadly never got to meet, but they are told about him every single day.

After 12 years of losing my brother, it still tears me apart.     I find it hard to trust anyone.    I find it hard to be around my family who I have no contact with at all.     I am on my own.   I cannot get close to anyone because I'm scared of feeling that hurt again, and I find it hard to not feel angry every day.

The day my brother was let down, his whole family were let down.    That is also what is not taken into consideration, the families that are alongside the troubles of our loved ones, we all carry it, we can see today, everyone, every single one of us, carries it, yet there's nothing in place to help us.

When trying to support our loved ones, we are told that staff cannot talk to us as the patient is an adult. Surely someone who is going through these struggles and not in the right frame of mind to make decisions for themselves must have family members that can speak for them, that can make the right decisions for them to keep them safe and to get them the help they desperately need or want, like my brother.        He asked, he pleaded for help.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.    And would you now play the video of the remaining photographs?

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Chair, we have one remaining account today.        It's an account that will be given by Stuart Ringer, and I invite him to go to the table.         Chair, Stuart will be talking about his friend Gosia Nowak and we have a photo of her on the screen.

Statement by Stuart Ringer
--------------------------

**Mr Ringer**: Madam Chair, ladies and gentlemen, I do not want to be here reading this statement but the status quo cannot remain.    So I'm here to tell you about Malgorzatta Elzbieta Breczko-Nowak, 1977 to 2019.

The image I carry in my head is not the one that you see in that photo.      The image I carry is this lady laying in a bed as if she's asleep, she's still holding her teddy bear but she is white and cold.        This is my memory from 8.00 am on 27 June 2019, less than 24 hours after having a meeting with her care co-ordinator in a building less than five minutes' walk from where we are now.   This memory is seared into my mind and my very soul.

For clarity, the above person was known to me as Gosia, which is short for Malgorzatta.     She also used the abbreviation of her second name, Elzbieta, and was known to others as Ela.

I first met Gosia in 2001.    We remained friends until her death in 2019.    When I first met Gosia, she was someone brimming with confidence, attitude and a passion for life.   She could walk into a room and every head would turn.    She was glamorous and passionate, passionate about literature and old films. Her idol was Marilyn Monroe.     She also loved to cook and took great pleasure in seeing people enjoy what she had created.

Behind this passion though, there always appeared a dark shadow, one that she would keep hidden and would fight tooth and nail to keep suppressed.    Through our 18-year friendship, I would at times attempt to discuss this but it was completely taboo.    There was very much a fight or flight reaction that could be set off by the smallest things.   This was especially noticeable when the subject of her teenage years would come up.

After many years of friendship, she finally opened up about the darkness that cast that shadow.    She grew up in Poland in the grip of socialist rule, the country dominated by Russia and the Catholic church.    Her childhood was austere with the poverty that went with the time but appeared happy enough.    She was the child of a single mum.   She never knew her genetic father.

When she was 15, her mother disappeared from her life and she went to live with other members of the family who were reluctant to take her in.    Finally, she moved in with her grandpa, a man she loved.    She felt safe with him, she felt protected.     I don't know much about him but he was clearly a tough man.    He survived as a political prisoner in Auschwitz and later lost a leg in a farming accident.   Gosia would recall stories of him taking her fishing and cooking her catch over a fire.   She loved the simple life.   She would, however, describe him as being "bossy" and "grumpy" but she clearly had a deep affection for the man.    Sadly he passed away when she was 17 and she was on her own and, again, she felt let down by life.

This is a theme that will reverberate through her life to the very end, a theme that, in my opinion, the mental health teams she saw through the years failed to comprehend or examine.

Gosia and I had a friendship that lasted many years, we are both opinionated people and at times would disagree, but agreeably.     We both loved food so we would often share a meal together and a bottle of wine.

In around 2008/2009, I noticed that we were not having one bottle of wine, it would be two, with her drinking most of it.   In 2010 she asked if she could stay with me for a few days as her relationship had ended and she needed somewhere to stay while she got back on her feet.    I agreed as I was due to go off travelling for a few months and was happy to have someone take care of my property.

It was upon my return that her reliance on alcohol was evident, as was her deteriorating mental health. She had run out of money and she had nowhere to go.       She had no family, or at least not one she trusted.     And it's amazing how quickly friends can vanish when they see you have mental health and addiction issues.    The next few months will be the steepest learning curve of my life.   I was immersed in a world of addiction and mental health collapse.     I would also be exposed to a health system that, at its best, is not fit for purpose and, at its worst, abuses its power and is callous and cruel.

Over the following years Gosia lived in various locations and attempted to engage with various social services and charities, but due to the combination of anxiety, addiction and depression, she found herself made homeless on various occasions.     Through this period, I did my best to support her emotionally and financially, as well as keeping my home open for when she was made homeless.

From 2013 to 2016 she lived in Harlow.      At this point, I had moved here to Chelmsford.     Harlow had limited work options so she had been picking up jobs here in Chelmsford.   She would stay in my spare room Monday to Friday while she worked and for the first time in years I saw a smile on her face.     I have a lovely memory of her cycling off to her day's work and thinking to myself, "We've got there.     Finally we've got there".

When she was made homeless for the final time in November 2016, I had no hesitation in suggesting she move into my spare room.   It was big and spacious, she had her own room of freedom.   I was just glad to see her happy.   But things did not last.    By mid-2017, the wheels had come off the wagon.      They would never go back on again.

In early 2018, she'd had a detox and rehab funded by a charity called Action on Addiction.     Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales is a patron of the charity, and while Gosia was in attendance Catherine visited the centre.

Addiction is a nasty and unforgiving disease. Society does little to recognise its devastating effects.    The one thing I have learnt is no one chooses to be an addict.    It is not a lifestyle choice.     It is a disease, yet it is rarely treated as one.     Not once, not once did I hear a healthcare professional ask her, "What are you blocking out with alcohol?"

Gosia had two stints in a psychiatric ward in Colchester, first in December 2018 and for a second time at the end of May 2019 for ten days.    She was released on 5 June and brought by ambulance to my property. I was not informed that she was being discharged to my care.     I was not at any stage given a care plan.   I was not given a diagnosis, and, most worryingly, I was not given a medication plan at any stage.

People have time and again failed her.   They have mistreated her and walked away from her when she needed it.   I refused to do that.   The mental health care co-ordinators that she engaged with in both Brentwood and Chelmsford did nothing to create a bridge of trust to her.     Her greatest distrust was towards men.    In fact she would often say, "Men are pigs".     She trusted two men: her grandpa and me.

Gosia had an engrained distrust of people.    She had been failed by those that should have protected her time and again throughout her life.     I believe the mental health team in Chelmsford created heightened levels of anxiety in Gosia by their action towards our friendship, and I believe this was a major factor in her rapid mental health decline.

At 2.00 pm on 26 June 2019, Gosia had her final meeting with her care co-ordinator.    She was accompanied by a long-time friend, Melanie Ferguson.    Ms Ferguson is a registered nurse.   She had set out in a letter, that is in the possession of our counsel, the failings she witnessed first-hand in that meeting, and I hope that the Inquiry has the time to view this.

It's impossible to know what Gosia was thinking. I can only recount the facts.    She left that meeting at 3.00 pm, sourced a large amount of alcohol and was dead within 17 hours.

So how has this affected me?    Throughout the nine years I looked after Gosia, I always believed that I was coping.    I have broad shoulders and I have a capacity to deal with stress and the rocks that life throws at you.   However, when she died, I realised I had been gravely mistaken.   I never sought help during these years.    I should have.    I thought I could deal with it all.     I couldn't.

Our relationship was a complex one but it was not until I started writing a eulogy for her funeral and I wished to convey what she meant to me that I came to this conclusion.       She had become a sister I never had, and in many ways the child I have not had.      As her mental health deteriorated, she would often become childlike and watch cartoons for hours on end as if she was retreating to a safe place, a place that existed before the world ripped out her innocence.

In the five years that have passed since her death, I have relived that moment time and again.      I have relived the nine years of looking after her time and again.    I sought initial therapy for grief, which helped, and helped me through a period of real and visceral pain.    In an attempt to heal some of the pain, last year I undertook a 16-and-a-half-thousand-mile motorcycle ride to the borders of Afghanistan and back to the UK to raise money and awareness for mental health charities.    I raised around £10,000 across three charities, money that I know will help others that have suffered the same as she did.

The power of helping people, people that you will never know or meet, is amazingly cathartic.       But I am still receiving therapy at my own expense for the ongoing trauma of grief and the nine years of caring and battling an inflexible system, nine years of seeking help from a broken system that seems more interested in protecting itself than helping those that it's set up to help and protect, nine years of being told that I am an enabler when all I was doing was my best to help someone I cared for, nine years of watching someone lose their grip on life and not wanting to be here anymore, nine years of watching someone being failed time after time by those that were responsible for her care, nine years of feeling helpless when you come up against the power of the establishment and their desire to protect themselves.   Clearly I still get emotional over these events but mainly I just feel numb.

We are here to look at the deaths of over 2,000 people.   Each death is a tragedy.   What we are not looking at is beyond this, to a network of collective trauma, a collective trauma of mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters, wives, husbands, children, friends. This runs into a multiple of that 2,000.    Perhaps it's 5,000, perhaps it's 10,000, we will never know.     We are all in search of answers, accountability and justice.

But what does that justice look like?   It will be different for everyone.    For me personally, the best thing for me to heal would be to see real and systemic change in the way mental health care is delivered.      I do not want to see others suffer as I saw Gosia suffer. I do not want to see families and friends of those that suffer poor mental health go through the pain and grief of loss.     We are left with a life sentence of pain and grief due to the system and staff which have both failed in their duty of care.

I know this is a heavy burden to place upon your shoulders, Madam Chair.       However, I truly hope that you can be part of this change.      Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: We have a few more photos, Stuart.

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the last of the photographs to go with that account, and indeed that's the last account of today.

**The Chair**: So can I thank Mr Ringer for that very moving account, and indeed everybody else who has spoken today. They've been very insightful experiences and we are deeply grateful to everybody.     Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: We're back tomorrow at 10 o'clock.

*(2.44 pm)*

*(The hearing adjourned until Tuesday, 17 September 2024 at 10.00 am)*

