.. raw:: html

   <a id="hearing-link" href="https://lampardinquiry.org.uk/hearings/day-11-commemorative-and-impact-accounts/">Official hearing page</a>

Hearing Day 11
==============

.. raw:: html

   <details id="hearing-meta" open>
        <summary>
            <span class="open">Hide video</span>
            <span class="closed">Show video</span>
        </summary>
   <lite-youtube videoid="8iOBLV0wGyA" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   </details>

*(10.51 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, this is the third and final day of this hearing and we will hear further commemorative and impact evidence and, indeed, this morning you have already heard one account in private.      A reminder to everyone of the emotional support that is available, either through the Inquiry team's mailbox, at contact@lampardinquiry. org.uk, or via the website, lampardinquiry.org.uk at the "Support" tab.

Chair, you will now be hearing the commemorative account of Lynda Costerd.      It is about her father, Geoffrey Toms, and it will be read by Counsel to the Inquiry, Rachel Troup.

Statement of Lynda Costerd read by Ms Troup
-------------------------------------------

**Ms Troup**: Commemorative account of Geoffrey George Toms, 11 May 1927 to 14 May 2015.

"It is very hard to put together a commemorative statement about someone who had so many redeeming qualities and a real character and a bit of a charmer, but I will attempt to try.

"My dad was born on 11 May 1927 and was named Geoffrey George Toms.     I always thought it sounded like a really posh name but my dad definitely couldn't ever be described like that.       He was born in Erith and he was one of four brothers.

"The Toms family were already quite well known due to their sporting prowess and my dad certainly strived to carry on this prowess but, instead of becoming a runner like his dad, his passion was cycling and he was really good, and even a talented professional for a while.

"He met the love of his life, my mum, through club cycling.   Three years later they married, on 24 May 1951.   Due to his cycling, Dad always kept his hair in a buzz cut and Mum asked him to let it grow a bit for the wedding but when he turned up at the church he was sporting a freshly buzz cut head of hair.

"My mum was my dad's whole world and they were pretty inseparable.     The day he passed was only ten days until their 65th anniversary.    Dad was very romantic when it came to Mum.    He initiated a renewal of their vows on their 50th anniversary and ensured mum had a bouquet of the same flowers as she had carried 50 years before.

"My mum and dad went on to have two children: myself and my older brother.     My dad was a good dad but quite strict in his requirements of behaviour, though it has to be said that when he became a grandad he became a complete and utter pushover, something I did point out to him many times.

"Dad worked in sales throughout most of his life and he really had the gift of the gab.   As the old saying goes, he could sell water to a fish.

"Dad was never predictable and definitely kept Mum on her toes.    She often used to tell us how he used to drive off to work in whatever car they owned at the time but would drive home in something completely different, as he had done a deal or a trade with someone as he had got bored with what they had.

"Dad was a real character and a proper charmer.      He had this way of making all the women among their friends feel really special but in such a way that it was never misconstrued.    There are so many antics and behaviours I could tell you about which were all part and parcel of my dad, but being as that would take way too long, I will just mention a few of them.

"My dad was capable of falling asleep anywhere.      He was known to have fallen asleep at a party with his back against the speaker with the music blaring out.   He also hated the cold so much and I remember I had gone on holiday with Mum and Dad and I had tricked Dad into thinking that the water was really warm, when it was in fact freezing cold.    Dad was a person who just dived straight in, and in this case straight back out again. It gave Mum and I a really good laugh.

"Dad always used to tell me how proud he was of me and he had a way of looking at you with so much love. I had a daughter and he always used to refer to mum, myself and Kerry as his three girls.

"Unfortunately, by the time Kerry had her own daughter, Dad had been diagnosed with vascular dementia, but his love for Kerry's daughter still shone through, and we have some amazing photos and memories of the time they got to spend together.   He was walking with a stick by then and, like all small children, she wanted to mimic her Pops, so he cut a walking stick small enough for her to use and they used to walk hand in hand, both with their sticks.

"Dad was a very proud man and he hated what vascular dementia was doing to him and his inability to look after Mum and his girls made him so angry and upset.    He and I had quite a few conversations about how much he hated himself and his life now, and he did use to say about how he didn't want to live like this any more. This disease stripped him of his dignity, strength and the overarching love he had for his family.

"I was away on holiday when my daughter rang to tell me that the visiting nurse had decided that Dad should be admitted to Rochford Hospital where they would be able to help him with his talk of ending it, even though Dad had vascular dementia and these were not rational thoughts and feelings.   My Dad walked into Beech Ward on Tuesday, 8 May 2015.    By 11 May, his 88th birthday, he looked like he had been beaten severely.   He had an obvious broken nose, two black eyes and so many other injuries but he was also, as we now know, comatose. Within less than a week they had stripped my dad of absolutely everything: his dignity, strength, mobility and any independence he might have had.   It was beyond horrific to see the damage that had been done.

"On 14 May 2015 he passed away in Southend hospital as a result of the injuries and infection from his very short time on Beech Ward.

"Life without Dad is so hard.   Mum had lost her soul mate.    I have lost one of my best friends and Kerry and her daughter have lost the best Grandad and Pops you could ever wish for.    We will never get over the guilt we feel over leaving him alone with people who treated him so horrifically and denied him the love and support he needed.   The constant anger is so tiring and we can only hope something positive will come out of this Inquiry and nobody else will suffer whilst in their care."

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Amanda, would you put up all of the photographs now please.

*(Photographs were displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the last of the photographs and indeed the end of that account.

**The Chair**: I would like to thank Lynda for her very moving account of her father Geoffrey.       I'm very grateful to you.

**Mr Griffin**: We now hear an account provided by Paula Watkins and it's about her brother Kevin Watkins.       It will be read by Counsel to the Inquiry, Kirsty Lea on Paula's behalf.

May I ask first that the photograph is put up.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

Kirsty, please start when you are ready.

Statement of Paula Watkins read by Ms Lea
-----------------------------------------

**Ms Lea**: A heartfelt plea to Baroness Lampard from Paula Watkins regarding the tragic loss of Kevin Watkins.

"Dear Baroness Lampard, with a heavy heart I write to you about my beloved brother, Kevin Watkins.        The pain of his loss, now 15 years past, still feels as raw as the day we lost him in February 2009.       He was just 42 years old, a life cut tragically short by a system that failed him when he needed it the most.

"Kevin was more than just a statistic.      He was a soul brimming with kindness, a laugh that could light up a room and a heart so big it seemed to encompass the world.   But beneath his warm exterior lay a deep unhealed wound: the loss of our brother to suicide in 1989.

"This tragedy cast a long shadow over Kevin's life, a shadow from which he never fully emerged.     The thought of our parents having to bury their child, of our family gatherings forever missing his presence, it's almost too much to bear.   Every birthday, every Christmas, every family milestone is a stark reminder of the empty chair where Kevin should be sitting.

"What makes his loss even more unbearable is the knowledge that it could have been prevented.    In the weeks leading up to his death, Kevin had been in a mental health facility, a place where he should have been safe, where he should have received the care he so desperately needed.   Instead, he was released without a care plan approach, a critical oversight that still keeps me awake at night.

"I can still hear Kevin's words echoing in my mind, his desperate plea to the mental health team, 'If you release me, I will take my life'.    How could these cries for help have fallen on deaf ears?    The anguish of knowing that Kevin predicted his own fate, only to have it disregarded, is a torment I wouldn't wish upon anyone.

"In the aftermath of Kevin's death, my grief transformed into a relentless pursuit of justice and change.    Every letter written, every complaint filed, every sleepless night spent pouring over documents, it was all fuelled by the hope that no other family would have to endure what we have but, time and time again, we have been met with closed doors and hollow promises.

"Learning that nearly 2,000 other precious lives have been lost under the care of this Trust has shaken me to my core.    Each of those 2,000 was someone's Kevin: someone's brother, son, father, friend.    The magnitude of this tragedy is almost too much to comprehend.

"Baroness Lampard, I implore you, please don't let Kevin's death and the deaths of so many others be in vain.     When I close my eyes, I can still see Kevin's smile, hear his laughter, I can feel the warmth of his hugs.     But I also see the faces of 2,000 others, lives cut short, families left shattered.

"The documents I have submitted, the Ombudsman reports, the Serious Untoward Incident report, the correspondence, they tell a story of systemic failure, but they can't convey the depth of our loss, the endless nights of tears, the birthdays we will never celebrate, the milestones Kevin will never see.       I beg you, from the depths of my grieving heart, to be the catalyst for real, meaningful change.      Let Kevin's story and the stories of all those we have lost be the force that reshapes our mental healthcare system.       Too many hearts have been broken.     Too many lives cut short.

"With hope, Paula Watkins."

**Mr Griffin**: Could the final photograph be put up now, please.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.    Chair, that is the end of Paula's account.

**The Chair**: Well, I'm extremely grateful to Paula for a very, very powerful account.    Please pass on my thanks to her.

**Mr Griffin**: We will now hear a commemorative account about Richard Astill.    It is by his brother and his daughter, Jim Astill and Louise Astill.    It will be read by Rachel Troup on their behalf.    Before Rachel starts would Amanda please put up the photograph.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.    Rachel, please start. Statement of JIM and LOUISE ASTILL read by MS TROUP

**Ms Troup**: Commemorative account about Richard Astill.    This account will be in two parts, first from Jim, Richard's brother, and then from his daughter, Louise.

"Richard was adopted by William and Gladys Astill when he was around three years old.   Prior to this taking place, he had been with a foster family rather than with his biological parents.   Jim was also adopted and was four years younger than Richard.

"Richard had his children, a son in 1991, a daughter, Louise, in 1993 and another son in 2003.

"In the 1970s, we were living in Whitwell, Derbyshire, and Bingham, Nottinghamshire.   This was undoubtedly the time where I was the closest to my brother, as we were both under 10 for most of the decade.   He was as happy as any child could be during this time.   We were both cared for very well, even though times were tough financially for our parents.     We shared a bedroom during this time and often played games until the street lights went out just after midnight.

"Times were very different in the '70s and, being older than me, it wasn't uncommon for him to be out with his friends for most of the day, coming home at the time he was asked to by our mum.

"We holidayed mostly at the same place in North Wales, year after year, but it was just as exciting, even though we did visit the same types of places each year.

"Richard was 10 in 1977 and I guess this is when we started to develop our own paths, more so for him, I guess.   Towards the end of the decade, we moved to Bingham in Nottinghamshire and from this point onwards we had our own bedrooms.

"In the 1980s we were living in Bingham, Chesterfield in Derbyshire and Spalding in Lincolnshire. The early '80s were a more turbulent time.     We moved in relatively quick succession through our parents' work. Richard did take to the changes relatively well, as he was much older and more confident.   We lived in Bingham between 1979 and 1983, which means we were quite settled during this period.   For a time, we were at the same school but we didn't really mix due to our age ranges.

"Our holidays to North Wales continued and I remember Richard getting into trouble with a few others for drawing on one of the toilet blocks.     Our parents were quite embarrassed by this but I thought it was quite cool and I admired him for doing it.

"We lived in Chesterfield for six months in 1983 and there is nothing meaningful to report from this period. We finally settled in Spalding in late 1983 and that area became his home as he started his adult life.

"By this point, we had separate lives, as Richard had started college and, by the end of the decade, he had started work.    During this time, he made some good friends that have all supported each other.    They did some crazy things, had some good nights out and started seeing girls on a regular basis.

"Towards the end of the 1980s, he did become a little unsettled.    My dad always said this was down to the issues of his very early life and being adopted at a later age.   There was talk at this point of him searching out for his birth parents but, to my knowledge, this never went any further.

"I can't remember exactly when he met his ex-wife. It was later in the 1980s and, from memory, they married in 1988 or 1989.    A standout memory was when we both had mopeds.    He had a Lambretta, from what I could remember. We would regularly go for a relatively slowish ride down some of the rural roads around Spalding.    I remember meeting him in a supermarket car park one Sunday on our bikes.    He was letting his wife have a go.   It was very funny.

"As I spent most of the '80s in school and college and Richard had started work, we didn't really see much of each other from that perspective.

"In the 1990s, Richard was living in Cambridge and Colchester in Essex.   Richard's work took him from the Inland Revenue to British Telecom and saw him initially living in the Cambridge area with his wife.      These were definitely happier times in Richard's life.      His two children were born and he got a better job with BT that took him to Colchester.      There were various family trips to Colchester to see him and the family but these were few and far between.

"Things got a little more complicated when Richard and his wife split up but they did their best collectively for the children.      Richard had told me he was happy that she had met someone who cared about his children.

"Richard lived most of the later '90s either single or in shorter-term relationships.      During this period, we spent a little more time together at weekends and had some epic nights out.     On reflection, I think this is when he started to suffer with his own mental health, as he didn't have a particularly stable personal life.

"Some stability returned later in the 1990s as he met his partner who also worked at BT with him in the Colchester area.   They had a good life together and for Richard this was the stability that he needed.

"In the 2000s Richard was living between Colchester and Lausanne, Switzerland.

"My first two children had arrived by 2001 and, on a semi-regular basis, we would travel down to Colchester and meet up with Richard and his partner, along with his son and his daughter, Louise.   We would spend time doing family things, such as visits to the zoo.   For a reason unknown to his family, Richard decided to take a job for Orange in Switzerland in 2002, which meant he was living between the UK and Switzerland.   His relationship with his partner continued, until he started a new relationship.   This led to a separation from his previous partner and, following the new relationship, his youngest son was born in 2003.

"I visited Richard in Switzerland and, whilst it was initially clear he had made a new life for himself, he didn't always appear happy.   In the UK, he had many good friends but in Switzerland I think those he thought were friends played on his insecurity and it was this period that ultimately led to the decline in his mental health.

"I remember a visit to Switzerland in 2003 to collect Richard's belongings as he returned permanently to the UK, living back with his previous partner.     To this day, I don't know what really happened out there but it's clear he was not himself and the paranoia had set in.   A comedy moment during this trip was when I joked about the van getting drug searched when returning to the UK.   It was this moment that Richard realised there was still something in the van: this was quickly disposed of.

Ultimately, it was this paranoia that led to him taking his own life in March 2004.     I recall a conversation with him on the evening he died where we reflected on our lives together.

"Despite this, his legacy continues in his sons and his daughter, Louise, and they are three fantastic children, who are now adults themselves.    His youngest son was very young and clearly didn't know his dad but, for the older two children and those around them, I know that it was very hard."

The next part of this commemorative account is from Richard's daughter, Louise.

"My dad was a brilliant father.    He was loving, bright, generous and patient but, above all, he was fun and silly.    He was full of life and he was very loved by everyone in his life.     He always had time for his children, to do activities, to help with homework or to play games.     He always knew how to get a smile and a laugh out of us, whether it was doing silly voices, cracking terrible dad jokes or attempting funny walks in the park.     He loved to take us on adventures, to picnic in the forest, or paddle boarding in the sea.     Most of our holidays as children were with him, taking us to new places.

"He loved his children fiercely and would do anything for us.    He was my best friend and, when he was around, I didn't feel like I needed anyone else. I wanted to spend all of my time with him.

"Whilst my brother and I predominantly lived with our mum growing up, we frequently stayed with our dad on Thursday nights and every other weekend, until he moved abroad for work.    Our time together was filled with days out, activities, fun in the garden or cuddled up on the sofa watching TV.    Even when he moved abroad for a period, we were still very close.   We would speak on the phone most nights, talking about our days.   He always made time to answer my calls, even when he was busy with work or life.

"Our trips to Switzerland to see him were always full of fun and excitement.   We went sightseeing, tobogganing and sledging.    He would speak French haphazardly, frequently asking for ham and chocolate croissants, getting funny looks from locals and giggles from us.

"Dad was never the best cook but always tried his best, frequently calling his mum, my grandma, for recipes and cooking tips.    He thought he was a master of the barbecue and we pretended we didn't see the prawns that had fallen between the slats.    He attempted to make cheese fondue, which was far too boozy and infused with his own chili oil.    He often tried to get us to eat the spicy foods he loved.    We would often go on out for dinner, trying all sorts of new foods together.     Being foodies our thing.

"He had an eclectic taste in music and bought me my first album, By the Way, Red Hot Chili Peppers.     We would sing along to it in the car at the top of our voices.     He was a keen runner, taking part in numerous races, and he always hoped to one day run the London Marathon.

"He helped me with my studies, teaching me the importance of this, which I have carried through my life.     He started to read us the Harry Potter books and took us to see the initial films in the cinema.     These remain my favourite books.

"He would come and visit us out of the blue and it was always the best day if he turned up.    His laugh and energy always filled up the room.    For me, my dad was the person who I could always turn to and rely on, no matter what.

"Dad's mental health deteriorated quite rapidly in the final years of his life.     It all happened quickly. His personality changed, he became paranoid and frightened.    Despite this, there were still glimpses of his former self there and it was a battle he fought to remain with us for as long as he could.

"His death still has a profound effect on us 20 years on.    We have lived more days without him than we were able to have with him.      Whilst we are grateful for every day we were able to spend with him, it was not enough.    He was gone too soon.    He has missed out of so many big life events.    He never got to see me graduate or got to meet my fiancé and see me getting married.       He never saw his youngest son growing up or saw how well his eldest son has done in his life.

"I still struggle to talk about him.    It is too difficult.    I continue to carry the grief and the anger. Whilst it has become less heavy with time, it stays with me.   I blamed myself, believing I let him down and I have had to live with that since he died.

"The trauma and hurt associated with losing our dad at such a young age has shaped our lives.     We had to grow up too fast, losing our carefree childhoods. I often think about how different our lives could have been if he was still in them.      He was a bright light that went out the day he died."

**Mr Griffin**: Would you please put up the further photographs, Amanda.

*(Photographs were displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: That is the final photograph there, Chair, and the end of that account.

**The Chair**: My thanks go both to Jim and Louise for the account of their brother and father, Richard.       I'm very grateful.

**Mr Griffin**: We now move to an account that has been provided by Jackie Hammond and it's about her mother, Diana Hammond.    It will be read on Jackie's behalf by Kirsty Lea.

Amanda, would you put up the photograph first please.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Kirsty, would you please read Jackie's statement when you're ready.

Statement of Jackie Hammond read by Ms Lea
------------------------------------------

**Ms Lea**: "My name is Jackie Hammond and I am the daughter of Diana Hammond who was born 9 April 1945 and died aged 60 on 3 December 2005.

"My mum died at Broomfield Hospital A&E after absconding from the Linden Centre in Essex where she had been getting treatment.      I have two younger brothers.

"My mum was always very loving and everyone loved her.     She was chatty and bubbly and always good with children.     However, my mum suffered with recurrent depressive disorder and bipolar.    She experienced very high highs and very low lows.    She would have manic episodes and mood swings and would suffer from periods of no sleep.

"My first memory of my mum having a mental health crisis was when I was about 10 years old.    It was at this time that she tried to harm us, so we went to live with my aunt for a year or so.     We moved a couple of years after that.

"I recall my mum being well for the early part of the move, but then the stress of it all being too much for her and her mental health deteriorating.

"My mum had suffered with suicidal thoughts and had multiple admissions into mental health facilities.      She made multiple attempts to end her life, including one occasion when my younger brother had found her.    I have found out since her death that she attempted suicide more times than we knew when she was alive but I do not know how many attempts were made.

"There were sustained periods in which my mum was well, the longest being 15 years.    I was in my late 20s during this time and had gone to work in Australia, as I felt she was well enough that I could go, although I would come home every year to see them, as I got homesick.   During this time, she was on medication that seemed to fit her well.      It was after I got back from Australia, around 2003, that her medication changed. I don't know why her medication was changed as she had been stable.    At the time, she was treated by a doctor in Southminster and my dad just told me that they had changed it but didn't elaborate on the reasons.

"We weren't told much when we were younger as our dad dealt with much of the detail of caring and supporting our mum.    He still finds it very difficult to talk about my mum and what happened.

"In 2003, after my mum's medication was changed, she was treated on and off at the Linden Centre, mostly under Section, but there were voluntarily instances as well.   I think the first time she was taken to hospital after the medication change was when she had been found in a park in Basildon, after taking an overdose.      She was admitted in Basildon and then moved to the Linden Centre from there.    Mum's first admission to the Linden Centre led to a prolonged stay of a few months, and we would visit her regularly.      After that, she was re-admitted on a few occasions when she was unable to cope at home.    She was getting no sleep at all and was a risk to herself and her family.

"On 16 November 2005, my mum was admitted to Finchingfield Ward at the Linden Centre, as she was actively talking about suicide.    I believe this was under Section.   Whilst she was at the Linden Centre, the nurses would communicate to us what she had done or what medication they had given her.     They would give her medication, as well as try and do some talking therapy and group therapy.   She had always been so chatty and bubbly but, when she was on the medication, she was drowsy and quiet and more introverted, so I don't know how she got on with the groups.

"When we would visit her at the Linden Centre, we would walk around the grounds there or, if the weather was poor, we would sit in the TV rooms with her.     We thought Mum was getting treated and that she was in the place where she could be helped.

"The Linden Centre told my dad they wanted to try electroconvulsive therapy, ECT, on her.    The electric therapy had been explained to Dad and he relayed it to myself and my brothers.     We were all hopeful it would work and I think my mum was too.

"On 2 December 2005, after the second session of ECT, my mum absconded from the Linden Centre.     She was meant to be watched every 15 minutes, so I don't know how she could have got out, as it seemed so secure.        She must have not been being observed properly and sufficiently and obviously something went wrong.

"When my father rang me to tell me she had gone missing, I went home and met him and we drove around looking for her, before we got a call from the Transport Police who said she had been found.    She had been found seriously injured on the train tracks and taken to Broomfield A&E.    She died in the early hours of 3 December 2005.

"As a family, we were distraught at the circumstances of Mum's death and couldn't understand how she had been able to abscond from a facility we thought was secure and meant to protect her.

"Following her death, my father pursued legal action against the Linden Centre and an inquest was held, looking into the care she received, although to my knowledge there was no internal investigation by the hospital.

"The hospital apologised but we didn't get much support from the hospital after she died.    The last time we went there was when we went to get her belongings and I don't think we had much correspondence with them. I never felt the hospital showed much remorse at all and it felt like they treated my mum as just another statistic.

"My mum's death has seriously impacted my own mental health and I have had NHS counselling sessions over the years and have tried therapy to come to terms with my grief.

"My mum was a loving and popular person with many, many friends, some from all the way back to her first job when she was a telephonist at Chelmsford Telephone Exchange.   I remember her going off to bingo and line dancing with her friends.    She loved music, especially ABBA and the Beatles.   She once went to a Tom Jones concert and kissed him, which was a story she loved to tell.    I happened to also meet him once on holiday in Spain and told him this and he asked, 'What was her name?'

"She was only 60 when she died and my children, aged 13 and 17, never got to meet her.   She would have made a lovely grandma.   She was so great with children and used to make the most fabulous chocolate cake, which I know they would have loved.   She got to meet my niece, who was only a few months old when she was alive.    She got to hold her and was great with her.   I used to work as a nanny and have the children I cared for around her. She was always so good with them.

"I have found it hard not having support from my mum with my own family and missing out on all the important milestones in our lives.

"I treasure the letters she wrote me when I was in Australia and the videos of Mum, often up and dancing, as she loved parties.      As my children grow older, I worry about them asking why she is not with us and what to tell them.

"I want to speak about my grief and experience, as I don't want this to happen to anyone else.         Something needs to be done to ensure that patients are monitored properly and especially prevented from harming themselves whilst under treatment and care within a facility.     I hope the work of the Inquiry succeeds in stopping other families from suffering the terrible loss we are still coming to terms with."

**Mr Griffin**: Please put up the final photographs.

*(Photographs were displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Chair, that is the end of Jackie's account.

**The Chair**: Can I thank Jackie for taking the time to provide that account.     It was very touching indeed, a very touching account of her mother Diana and I particularly thought the photographs were beautiful too.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Chair, the accounts we are now going to hear are about Michael Goldwater.      They're read by his sister Lisa Goldwater and she gives her own account and then she goes on to read the accounts of her partner, Aiden Spence and her son Connor Spence and I'm going to ask Amanda now to please play those accounts.

Pre-recorded statement by Lisa Goldwater
----------------------------------------

**Ms Goldwater**: My name is Lisa Goldwater and I am here to speak about my brother, Michael Paul Goldwater, who died on 5 April 2000, when he was just 35 years old.

Michael was adopted by our family when he was 10 days old and was the third child after my older brother, David, and myself.     My parents were so relieved to have him and he was welcomed into our family by all our relatives.     As Michael was only a couple years younger than me, we were close growing up.     He was a happy child, and used to tease my brother and I by saying we were just born but he was chosen.      When the inquest into his death took place, his adoption was stressed and emphasised as if it meant he wasn't my parent's actual child, or that he meant less to us, but this was not the case.    Michael was my little brother and I always wanted to protect him growing up.    Mike was very funny and chatty, and he made me laugh a lot.     He was kind and befriended children who were left out in his class, alongside loving animals and going to the zoo.

Michael had shown signs of mental health struggles as a teenager and would act out at times.   I remember the first time being frightened of him when he was about 15 but then things went back to normal for quite a few years.   It wasn't until Michael was about 18 that he really started to show signs of mental health problems. He had started to smoke cannabis and once told me he felt like he was stuck in a trip, other times he believed he had telepathy.   I was concerned and was training to be a mental health nurse at the time and so my mum and I got hold of a psychiatrist to come to our house to see him, but they told us Michael was fine.

When Michael was about 19, my parents were going on a big trip on the Trans-Siberian railway and I was worried about Michael being at home alone, so went down to stay with him with my boyfriend at the time.    It was during this time Michael first went into hospital.     He had barricaded himself into his room and when I tried to open the door, he became violent, throwing table legs at me and I later saw he had carved "Lisa die" into one of them alongside many other messages written about me. I was scared and my boyfriend managed to shout him down and stayed with him while I went to a nearby phone booth.   I called the emergency doctor and they took him to hospital.   I didn't want to put him into hospital but I was worried and I wanted to make sure he was okay for my parents.    He wouldn't let me go with him and I worry he never forgave me.

After that, Michael was in and out of inpatient care at Runwell Hospital, most of which was informal admission.    When he was home there were incidents of violence towards my parents, he was paranoid they were attacking him.   When he was in hospital, he always said he wanted to be home and this made my parents feel hugely guilty but he needed to be helped and we thought he would be.

Michael's diagnosis did change over the years but he suffered with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. He would self-medicate with marijuana and other drugs as he said this would stop him feeling anxious and stop him hearing voices but I think this was only making his mental health worse.   He would also be in hospital in intensive care for periods at a time as he wouldn't eat properly or take his medication for his diabetes.

Michael's stays at Runwell started in the early 80s and sadly continued until his death in 2000. He seemed to be in all the time, as each admission was for fairly extended periods.    When he was home it felt like it was just a matter of time before something happened. He was using drugs and I tried to get him help and let him come to stay with me but social services had washed their hands of him.   I wanted to help him but didn't know how and his illness took over our lives.     His mental health continued to deteriorate and he would be admitted back into hospital as an inpatient.   I always had the feeling his care was substandard and there was a lethargic air with a lot of people put into the big hospitals. I didn't like him being in hospital but you think, at least he will be safe.

My parents and aunt had visited Michael the day he died and say he seemed much brighter, buying them coffee and loving the gifts they brought him.     Later that day, the police arrived at my parents' door and told them that Michael had had a heart attack.   They said he had been taken to Basildon Hospital but as there were no intensive care beds he was being taken to Harlow.       When my mum and dad arrived at the hospital and saw him on life support the doctor then told them it was very bad news and the police wanted to speak to them because it was a homicide inquiry.

The morning after Mike went into hospital my parents rang me to tell me he had had a heart attack.     When I got to the hospital, I realised he had been restrained and he was put on a life support machine.    He had already lost his pulse.    It is all a bit blurry but I accidentally walked in when they were doing a brain stem test on him and I could just see the flat line. I grabbed my breath and that's when I realised there was no brain activity.

The circumstances of his death raised very serious concerns about the quality and timeliness of the care he received.   While no criminal proceedings were pursued, an internal investigation was conducted, resulting in temporary suspensions.   A year after Michael's death, an inquest recorded a verdict that his death had been accidental, which we were shocked at.

The Trust didn't offer us any support after Michael died and I saw my parents just getting older and older. I will always be angry about that.   It was all a bit secretive, mucky and my experience was there was no support whatsoever from the Trust.   We never got a sincere apology from the Trust for their failings in care.

The inquest was an extremely stressful and traumatic time and it felt everyone there was just trying to cover their own backs.   My parents didn't want to sue the NHS, we just wanted to know what had happened.   It felt like no one took the proceedings seriously and this took a huge toll on our family.   My dad suffered a major stroke and was completely paralysed, with no speech, that he never recovered from.   He died in 2004, just a few weeks later.    In 2005, my older brother went missing and was found dead after a week.    It was like a domino effect, everything happened one after the other.    It was harrowing.   It's not just what happened to Michael, it's also everything that happened as a result of it and the devastating impact that has left lasting scars that will never fully heal.

I share what happened to Michael in the hope that no other family will endure the same heartbreak and that urgent changes will be made to protect vulnerable patients in mental health care.    The number of families in Essex facing similar preventable tragedies is staggering and I hope this Inquiry brings about meaningful reforms, ensuring that this pain and trauma ends.

This is Aiden Spence's statement from a brother in law, as his relationship to Michael:

"I'm also a mental health nurse and had a positive relationship with Michael for years inside and outside of institutions and, at one point, invited him in to our family home when he was discharged from hospital.     This decision, we feel, was taken prematurely and I indeed wrote to his consultant requesting we discuss this, explaining that I was a senior forensic Community Psychiatric Nurse in a London borough. I did not receive a response.

"In a work capacity I had an in depth understanding of how the situation arose and was dealt with.    Mental health nursing is a small disparate community and for myself and Lisa it became smaller.    There were many events we needed to avoid at this point.

"The impact on my family was devastating.

"Our children, all at different ages, each dealt with it in their own way, some with more insight and understanding than others of course but all feeling the traumatic damage it hurled, particularly on their mother.

"This impacted on a daily basis to the extent that Lisa withdrew from the business -- by this time we owned and managed a mental health care home -- finding it difficult to engage and put her usual positivity into her work.     This, of course, meant me working and being away from the family for longer periods and Lisa trying to be present for the children on her own for longer periods, which I know she found a struggle.     This cycle, as cycles do, prevails in the family and is present to this day.

"Given the circumstances, I believe that together we coped extremely well.    I think we were very lucky to have been brought up in strong, nuclear families ourselves and if this were not the case it is unlikely that we would have stayed in one unit.   We also spent much of our time straddling the business with family responsibilities, thus integrating and creating a close healthy relationship with our Carehome residents. Witnessing Michael's deteriorating mental health in the community assisted in our motivation to set up our carehome for men displaying challenging mental health issues -- we hold an outstanding CQC rating.   The kids have never had Christmas dinner in our own house without a table full of paranoid schizophrenics and although I say that with a sardonic smile, I believe that our focus saved us from a much worse outcome.

"Strong families can find a way and, as parents, we always have to find positive outcomes to our often unique challenges.   All families experience trauma and after all, we are only as happy as our unhappiest child. Maybe that's what drives us.

"Thank you for giving us this opportunity to speak. It is, at the least, a wonderfully cathartic experience and helps us reflect and put some of the past into perspective in our own unique way."

When asked about the impact that Michael's death had, my oldest child, Conor, said:

"Well, it was horrible, of course and I saw it having a huge impact on everyone else.    It was very heavy.    Mum and grandma, in particular, became more withdrawn and snappy, with Grandad having a near-paralysing stroke within a year of the death in the following March.    The weight of the inquest was palpable in our home, having a significant impact on them and on all of us.    I didn't know the circumstances for a few years but I knew, even at seven, that it was strange for a 35-year-old to have a heart attack."

To conclude: the biggest impact on all of us was my father having a stroke after the inquest, my father dying and my brother, David, going missing ten months after that and being found dead.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of the accounts read by Lisa.

**The Chair**: Well, my thanks go to Lisa for providing a very moving account of her brother Michael and also to Aiden and Connor for their contributions.    Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we're now going to have a break for around half an hour, so I invite people to return at 12.20, that's for people on the live feed.    There's a ten-minute delay for those watching on YouTube.       So 12.20 for the live feed.     Thank you very much.

*(11.48 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(12.20 pm)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we will now hear -- Chair, we will now hear from Nicola Cotton about her brother, Darren Porter.      This is a pre-recorded account and you will see, sitting next to her, her aunt, Teresa Neale and before the video is played, Amanda would you please first put up the photograph.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.      Would you play the account.

Pre-recorded statement by Nicola Cotton
---------------------------------------

**Ms Cotton**: Hello, firstly a big thank you for letting me speak today, Darren passed away 15 September 2020 aged 41.

Darren was born 11th May 1979 I was already three and a half years old when he was born, we lived in Kent with our parents who were originally from Essex.

Darren had rosy, red cheeks and a cheeky giggle of a laugh; with very fluffy flyaway hair mum could never get to lay flat.

We spent most weekends going to Nanny and Grandad's in Essex.     Saturdays was fish 'n' chip day and we would regularly go to Romford Market with mum and our Auntie, then visit Grandma to see what she was baking.

Darren loved watching '80s shows like: The A-team, Dukes of Hazzard, Knight Rider, The Karate Kid, and many others.   This was in-between us going through the Index catalogue marking out what we wanted for our birthdays and Christmas.   He loved He-Man he had all latest action toys we were both very lucky.   Driving home from Essex to Kent we always played duck the bridge in the car and seeing who could spot Leeds Castle first through the trees, then we knew we would be home in about 20 minutes.

During holidays we would visit our dad's sister and family in Tolleshunt D'Arcy; we loved going there as it was remote and peaceful compared to our Kentish town. We would also spend time down at Maldon promenade, Holidaying in Yarmouth, Isle of Wight and Euro Camp in France with family and friends.

Christmas time, Essex family would come to Kent, Darren and I would bunk in together and my Auntie oversaw getting us to sleep.    One year, mum left a load of pressies in her wardrobe and she had to sneak in to retrieve them, Darren and I were hiding under the duvet watching -- must have been the year we realised there was no Santa.    Waking at 3.00 am we would both try and open our stockings -- not too sure why we bothered we could not see a thing -- and auntie telling us to go back to sleep.   One year we both got racing bikes, we cleared a path and were taking it in turns to ride around in and out of the living room to dining room and turning around in the kitchen at 6.00 am.

In 1989 we went to Gran Canaria this would have been our last family holiday as a four but Darren and I would never have known any different.   We had such a fantastic time, two weeks of fun, laughs, site seeing, camel rides, and cowboy shows.   Darren revisited the same place in later years and sent me photos of the hotel and sites.

Mum sadly passed away on 3 April 1990 from Cancer; Darren was 10, me, 14.

We slowly adapted as a family of three, we still went to Essex and dad's sister came to stay, making sure we were okay, then we would stay at hers with our cousins whilst dad could work in the school holidays.

Darren started secondary school and fitted in well, made loads of friends and they all had a love for BMX bikes: they would fix them up in our garage then head to Hastings to the ramps.   He was quite often found in the kitchen knocking up pancakes, my good friend always comments at this as being one of her fondest memories of him, singing his heart out and waking us up.

Dr Hook was the beginning of his love for the singer Peter Cetera who sang "glory of love" and the band he was lead singer in "Chicago" and this kick-started his lifelong passion for what we all called, his cheesy music which included Chicago and the Bee Gees.

I came home one day and Darren was crying, no idea what had possessed him but he had his hair shaved right down the middle.    Dad actually saw the funny side and we all started laughing and still did -- even in more so recent years.    Only thing was he had to have a grade nought to rectify it; he made me write a letter to school to say he had to wear a cap as he had a hair condition.

When Darren was eleven, he was diagnosed with glandular fever: he spent weeks in bed asleep.

I do not think he ever got over this as even in adult life he loved a drop of sleep.

Mid 1990's, dad remarried and the family moved to Sussex.     I did not go I was eighteen and had a job, so I managed to secure a room with a family friend then, later, got my own flat.

Darren, one Saturday in the pouring rain decided to come to Kent on his moped.     He had to come the coastal route, it took him hours and when he arrived, he was soaked through and so tired he slept for 12 hours solid and didn't even see his friends as he had to go back the next day.

Dad's marriage did not work out and he moved to Essex to be near his sister and set up home.    For a brief time, we all lived together again in Essex which was great to be under the same roof again as a family of three.

Dad met Ann, of whom he married and they have been together for over 20 years now, our family grew from three to eight and over twenty once all the grandchildren and great-grandchildren came along.

Darren moved back to Sussex after meeting a girl when he went back to visit a school friend for the weekend and the rest was history; they set up home and in time had two children.

In 2006 Darren started to show signs of Paranoia: he was convinced people at work were talking about him; following him, and trying to get him the sack.    He became very depressive, negative, even to the point a song which was number one in the charts at the time, Crazy by Gnarls Barkley, he thought was written about him.

On the 2 April they held a birthday party at the grandparents in Sussex's home.    One of the family friends who attended was a policeman and had noted strange behaviour in Darren, such as making an unusual speech full of guilt and sadness before doing birthday cake and then becoming suspicious of a Dr Hook song playing in the kitchen thinking it was a message from people telling him he needed to see a Doctor.

On the 3 April, Darren went into Tesco in Worthing for baby formula leaving his partner and Daughter sat in the car waiting.   This day was the anniversary of our mum's passing; Darren never returned to the car. A search was put in place; police were alerted quickly due to his mental health state and was supported by the police officer present at the party the day before.      We made posters, we searched and searched day and night, driving around for four days.

Just as his partner was about to leave to do a TV appeal to try and find him, Darren called his home phone to ask his partner if the paranoid thoughts were in his head or real?

Whilst being reassured over the call, the call was traced to a payphone near the site he went missing and the police were able to locate Darren and assure him that he was safe and ask him if they could take him to hospital to seek the help that he so clearly needed.     He gratefully went with them, and they took him to be assessed; he had been hiding in an abandoned garage.

At the hospital I remember running in and grabbing him but there was no emotion he was very tense and rigid.   It was like he was on a different planet; he didn't say anything.   There was nothing but I distinctively remember a smell which, later, I realised was stale congealed blood on his wrists where he had tried to slit them.

A doctor assessed Darren and it was immediately requested that he be sectioned.   A place in Chichester was available: we all drove him there.    By this time it was dark and very eerie; the place had high security. It was horrible leaving him, was like leaving a little boy but we knew, as well as Darren, that it was for the best, for his own safety.    He spent about four weeks in there till he was transferred to a less security unit near his home.   He spent several more weeks getting the help he needed to be able to return to the family.

For a while life seemed to be fine, Darren got a job, his second child was born.

Around mid-2007, His partner went on a holiday with the children and her mum, Darren was working in a self-employed role and felt he couldn't afford the time off even though he was asked to go along and the holiday had been paid for.    Darren didn't go, but literally a day into their holiday Darren, overnight, went downhill: he took some medication alongside alcohol.   Darren though, despite this, sought help from the Samaritans and it was them that called an ambulance who took him to the local hospital.   Whilst this was happening, Darren's partner had become concerned because he wasn't returning her calls or texts and hadn't shown up for plans she had made with friends to keep him busy and upbeat whilst she was away.    So she asked her stepdad to go to the house, it was then a neighbour had told him she saw him leave in ambulance; Darren was discharged under his care. With this, they both travelled to Spain to be with the family.   They spent the remainder of the holiday together which is what Darren needed.

Early 2008, their relationship mutually broke down and Darren decided to move back to Essex with our dad and stepmum.   He still had contact with the children and would visit weekends when not working, spend time down there and even bring the children back to Essex to visit the family.    Darren and his partner were dear friends still and there wasn't no animosity or hate and still this remained till he died.   It was just a case that they knew it was the right thing to do for everyone to recover from the damage that had taken its toll on them both.   Darren's health and the family's wellbeing with such small children to consider.    Both still very much loved each other and the decision, although the right one, was a very difficult one to be made.

Darren knew he had to give them space and not drag them down and this was the best way for everyone to be happy, including himself.

Mid 2009 he had another relapse.    This time though, he took himself off to The Brambles, a mental health clinic in Colchester, where he spent about two weeks rehabilitating himself and getting advice and help he needed.

From this he returned to dads and work, he even found himself a flat.

Over the years, Darren was so up and down.    One day you would talk to him and he was extremely low, then I would call back the next day and it was like he had won the lottery; no two conversations would be the same with him.    You did need a lot of patience and I did, as did Dad and Ann, they lived closer than me I was back in Kent.     He had many relapses and times he would turn up at their home in the early hours in tears, they would sit with him for hours, sometimes in silence till he was ready to talk, drinking lots of tea with dad.

Early 2018, Darren went to the doctors as he wanted help, he knew he needed medication and at the time was not on anything permanently.    He was a bus driver and he did not want to jeopardise his job or take something that could make him tired.     I am on the understanding he possibly was prescribed something.   The doctor then referred him for some cognitive counselling but the referral time was slow so Dad, Ann and I paid for him to have private counselling whilst he waited for an appointment, for which he was extremely grateful.     He never turned down help, he always found it difficult to open but it was easier for him to talk with strangers. He had private sessions which helped him massively.

Darren turned 40 in 2019 and he wanted to do another sky dive.   He had done one previously, back in 1999 and loved the thrill.   We all chipped in for his birthday and even paid for it to filmed to keep as a memory.

2020 started odd for everyone with COVID and I guess this gave Darren a lot of time to think.   I would often call him or vice versa when he was on a break.    We would chat about day-to-day stuff, give each suggestions on what Netflix films to download; he seemed fine, nothing out of the ordinary.

June 2020, when we were allowed to start mixing outside, I met him at the children's mums house.   We spent the day in Arundel with the kids, on the rowing boats, walking, chatting and eating ice-creams. I absolutely treasure this day.   I have a photo of us all balancing on a huge tree stump and a stranger took a photo; it's one of my last smiling memories of him. We also had a trip to Chessington World of Adventures, where we took the children for a fun filled day out.

August came, Darren brought himself a Mini Cooper. He loved these cars and had several before but this one was a classic red and his absolute pride and joy.     It was not cheap, so he brought it a tent to act as garage, to help preserve it.

Bus driving was not for Darren, really.   He loved driving but I think the people where a bit too much for him at times.   So, late August, he started the process to become a lorry driver.   He took the relevant on-screen tests and seemed extremely positive and excited and all was going well.

The week before Darren died, I can't recall anything different in him, we spoke as normal but something must have happened and triggered off his depression; he even signed himself off work.

On Sunday 13 September, my dad called me to say Darren was in a bad place, he was expressing signs of paranoia, guilt, and that he just didn't know what to do as he feared he was being watched by faces in the window across the road in a nearby building.   He was even convinced people were flashing there car lights as part of a conspiracy to capture him when, in reality, it was people probably being nice and letting the bus out.        He did not trust anyone; he was not eating as he thought he was being poisoned.   The crisis team were called, and Darren was visited that afternoon in his home.

Darren confessed to trying to take his life several months before; none of us were aware of this.    The guy asked Darren several questions about his state of mind, one being, "are you feeling suicidal"?    His response was, "yes".   No notes were made on this visit, all the guy could do was reassure Darren that someone would call him and visit the next day, Monday.   This did not sit well with Darren as there were quite a few trust issues. The guy left and did not submit his report till 23:59 that evening, hours after leaving Darren.

I called Darren the Monday morning and wanted him to know I loved him and was trying to get him to eat and drink -- reassure him all will be okay.   The conversation was very much one sided, he could not even sting more than 2 words together.

Problem with Darren: he carried unnecessary guilt. One that has stuck with me since his first relapse in 2006 is that on the day of our mum's funeral, after, he went off playing football with friends.   I don't remember this, neither my dad but he had seen this an awful thing to do and it carried heavy on his mind.      We both said to him, so many times, mum would not have wanted anything more than you to be happy and playing.

On Monday's visit, again, Darren asked if suicidal response was the same, he was, in-fact, worse than the Sunday due to lack of food and water.    His mind was very psychotic: he trusted no one, he was blank.    The guy asked several questions about his past.   He would have been aware of Sunday's visit and Darren's history as he was in the system.    No medication could be prescribed without a doctor and the first available appointment offered to Darren was on Wednesday 16th via a zoom call. This would never have worked for Darren; he needed face to face help and support.    His depression and anxiety and deteriorated and this call did not even guarantee medication would have been prescribed.

That Wednesday was also my uncle's funeral.    Darren had already expressed concerns and felt guilty for not being able to go.    We tried to reassure him this was not an issue, Dad said he would be with him during the zoom call.    As the day went on, he became more depressed and very vulnerable.    He even asked if he went to hospital where would he go, a response was "it wouldn't come to that".   This, to Darren, would have been a massive blow to him as would have seen this a negative.    He never ever had an issue with getting help, he would have seen this as people playing with his mind.

That evening, the mother of his children also called him with concern.     She recognised the signs of paranoia she had witnessed before and asked him, "do you feel safe"?    To which he replied, "no and I can't talk", as he felt he was being listened to and unable to talk freely.

On the morning of Tuesday 15 September, around 6.30 am, Darren sent himself to sleep forever.    He was found with a ligature around his neck.

I have no words on how I felt when my dad called me. All I remember is screaming, "No, he did not need to, go check there must be a mistake".    My poor dad was beside himself.   It breaks my heart knowing he was there, sitting with Darren on the floor, waiting to be collected by the coroners for several hours.

I then had to break the news to the children's mother who had to tell his children the devastating news that we had lost their father so suddenly.    Something I never thought I would have to do and breaks my heart to this day, having to say those dreaded words, "he's gone I'm so sorry".

When the police arrived, after the ambulance crew had finished, my dad was sat in the lounge and as the Inspector left, he heard him say to his PC, "mark it down as a suicide".     Nothing was said by dad till several weeks later, I figure the shock of absorbing his son had died hadn't sunk in but it seemed very insensitive and how on earth did he know what had happened just by glancing.   He had only spent five minutes upstairs, if that.

The first couple of days where a blur, then the coroner said he could not give a cause of death due to insignificant findings, no marks on him to show how he had died. From this it led to an autopsy being taken and then would go to an inquest.

This at first was very daunting and we all had mixed feelings and emotions.   We had no idea of the process, but looking back now it opened a massive assortment of problems and concerns we had that could be raised by us as a family.   So, we took this as a positive.

We requested a full EPUT report and statements and so did the Corner.   In-fact, from Darren dying to the actual, full, two-day inquest which was 22 months, we still had to chase and chase even on a few days before the start.

On reading the report there was so many failings, the report was half complete, a lot of copying and pasting, wrong information, silly things like they referred to Darren having one child of whom he has no contact with -- this was far from the truth.     It said Darren had denied any active intent, this again was not true as he had said so on the Sunday and this was documented in the report. Boxes ticked that indicated he should have been sectioned.    If someone who has a history -- and tells you they are suicidal and has recently tried -- tells you all this, then surely appropriate action is to get them in somewhere of security and help, especially when they are willing to go.

After two days of reading police, Ambulance, GODSAMS first report, coroner and Toxicology, on top of EPUT's input, the coroner concluded Darren's death as Asphyxiation by Ligature without Intention.    It could have been avoided.   The coroner also requested a regulation 28 be made by EPUT but we are yet to see this report.    In evidence, EPUT responded "yes, he should have been sectioned" and apologised for not doing so.   This was awful and soul destroying for us to hear.

I can only describe Darren's mental health issues starting the day our mum died, his psychosis crept in and this slowly ate away at him over the years leading to his death.    We didn't know what the future held, he may have spent time in and out of institutes, he may have become a long-distance lorry driver, cruising the towns and cities living his best life, we really don't know but what I do know is that it was cut short by the neglect and him not being taking seriously and with this, his future ended.

The impact on myself and the family I can only ditto what everyone else has said that has sat or stood here. It's affected us all in numerous ways.   My Dad and Ann have moved as they couldn't bear seeing the bus Darren would have been driving: it literally stopped outside their home.

I don't want this to be about me, I am strong and will fight.   We all sit here in the same boat which is filling up but one thing is for sure, we won't let it sink.

Darren was a fun-loving guy, a super dad who would do anything for his kids, he was kind, extremely hard working, we all miss him terrible -- especially that giggle.

A few weeks after his death we found, in my parents wedding album, tucked inside, letters written by Darren. One to myself and another to Dad and Ann.   We treasure these as he expressed his love and gratitude for us always being there for him.

My letter back to Darren would have read:

"There is no need for thank yous, you are my brother and a son to Dad and Ann, we would have always been there for you it's what, naturally, families do.      You do not need to thank or apologise to anyone, remember you are only human, no one owns you, I just wish you were listened to.     My only peace I have in all this is that our mum has you now under her wings and you can be clear of the demons. Love you always, Fly High little brother. xxxxx."

**Mr Griffin**: May we now see the further photographs.   Chair, Nicola has already referred to one or two of the happier events that you will see in these photographs.

Amanda, would you put them up.    Thank you.

*(Photographs were displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that's the final photograph and the end of the account.

**The Chair**: I extend my thanks to Nicola for that very moving account of her brother Darren and for sharing her memories of him with us.     Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: The next account is by Nyarumba Nota and it is about his son Christopher Nota and it will be read by Rachel Troup.

Amanda, would you first please put up the photograph.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

Rachel, please start when you're ready.

Statement of Nyarumba Nota read by Ms Troup
-------------------------------------------

**Ms Troup**: "My dearest son, Christopher Sampson Nota, it is with a heavy heart and profound sorrow that I write these words to commemorate your life, a life tragically cut short.    Captured images of you falling to your death, my son, are images I can never erase it from my mind.

"The systemic failures that plague our National Health Service's support for dual-diagnosed autistic individuals robbed you of your future and the pain of your absence is a wound that will never fully heal.     You were a beacon of light, a unique and beautiful soul who deserved so much more than the hand you were dealt.

"From the moment you entered this world you brought with you a radiant energy and an unwavering spirit. Your autism was an integral part of who you were, shaping your perceptions, your passions and your interactions with the world around you.   It was never a burden, never a deficit, but simply a different way of being, a different way of seeing the world.

"Your mother, Julia Hopper, spoke at length about your growing pains.   I adopt each and every word she mentioned.

"As a child, you were fascinated by numbers, by patterns, by the intricate workings of the world around you.    You had a thirst for knowledge, a desire to understand how things worked.    You loved learning about history, about science, about the universe and you had this amazing memory, able to recall facts and figures with incredible accuracy.    You were also talented in your own way at recognising sequences, interpreting them, expressing yourself through symmetry or arranging toys in a particular manner.     You possessed a keen eye for detail, noticing the nuances that others often missed.     You had an unwavering focus on your interests, pursuing them with passion and dedication, whether it was learning about historical events, mastering a new video game or immersing yourself in the world of music -- how you loved music!

"As you grew older, you would listen to your favourite songs for hours on end, lost in the rhythm and the melody.     Music was your escape, your solace, your way of connecting with something bigger than yourself. It was a language you understood, a language that spoke to your soul.     The world was a tapestry of sights and sounds to you, a symphony of sensations that you absorbed with an intensity that was both beautiful and awe inspiring, and you had a genuine love for the people in your life, expressing it in your own unique and beautiful way.

"The world, my dear son, was not always kind to you. The challenges you faced were immense and the resources available to support you were woefully inadequate. I remember the countless hours your mum and I spent searching for therapists, for schools, for programmes that could cater to your unique needs.   I remember the frustration, the anger, the despair that washed over us as we navigated a labyrinth of bureaucracy and indifference at trying to obtain support for an education support plan that took your special and individual needs into account.

"Because your mum stayed at home to focus on looking after you and your two brothers, she felt like she was constantly fighting, constantly advocating, just to get you the basic support you deserved during the early years of your education.    I recall the countless phone calls, the endless paperwork, the constant struggle to advocate for your needs.    I remember the feeling of isolation, of being lost in a system that seemed designed to exclude, rather than to include.    I remember the nights we lay awake worrying about your future, praying for a world that would embrace you for who you were, not judge you for what you were not.     I longed for a world that would see your potential, your strengths, your unique gifts.   I longed for a world that would celebrate your autism, not see it as something to be feared or pitied.

"The system failed you time and time again, leaving us to navigate a complex and often hostile landscape. The lack of understanding, the absence of tailored support and the persistent stigma surrounding autism created barriers that you should never have had to encounter.   But through it all you persevered, your spirit shining brightly despite the darkness that surrounded you.

"You taught us the true meaning of resilience, of finding joy in the face of adversity.    You remained patient, understanding and loving.    You never complained and you never gave up hope.    You found joy in the simplest things, the things that many take for granted. You revelled in the sensory experiences of life, finding wonder in the everyday.     You had this incredible ability to connect with people on a deep level, even when communication was challenging.     Your smile could light up a room.   Your laughter was contagious and your hugs were the warmest embrace.    We called it the 'Nota bear hug'.   You had a way of seeing the good in everyone and you taught me the true meaning of unconditional love.

"Do you remember that trip we took to New York City? Your stepmum Christine, you and I, explored the city together, hand in hand, navigating the crowds and the noise with a shared understanding.    We were a team, facing the world together and, in those moments, we felt an incredible sense of connection with you.    The way your face lit up watching the street performers in Times Square, the vibrant colours and the cacophony of sounds stimulated your senses in a way that only you could appreciate.    You were mesmerised by the towering skyscrapers, feeling the energy of the city pulse around you.    The hustle and bustle, the sheer vibrancy of it all captured your imagination.     You asked insightful questions.    Your curiosity driving you to learn and explore.

"As we toured the city, we could see the wonder on your face, your inquisitive mind asking questions about different cultures and lifestyles, taking in our feedback and thoughts and synthesising ideas into your own world view.    You saw the world with such wonder, such an eagerness to understand its complexities.       That trip was a testament to your spirit, your ability to find joy, even amidst the chaos.

"And who could forget that rainy afternoon we spent at that indoor American baseball facility?    The joy on your face as you swung the bat, the concentration in your eyes as you tracked the ball, the pure elation when you connected for a hit.     You had such a natural swing, a fluid motion that spoke to your innate athleticism. I watched you joyfully, seeing you as both the excited child you were and the determined young man you were becoming.     We laughed together, cheered each other on and, for a few hours, the world outside faded away.        It was just you and me sharing a moment of pure joy.       You were safe with me, a moment that I will treasure forever.

"These moments, these precious memories are etched forever in my heart, a reminder of the beautiful bond we shared.

"My wife and I even braved a comedy club with you. The laughter and the energy of the crowd washing over you.    You may not have understood every joke but you were entertained by our unease with some of the humour and we secretly cherished it, knowing that you felt perhaps too overprotected by us.     You also experienced the collective laughter in the room, the shared experience of human connection.    You loved being part of the audience, feeling the energy and the excitement. You laughed along with everyone else, your own unique laughter adding to the symphony of sounds.     It was a reminder that, even in your unique way of experiencing the world, you still wanted to connect to something larger than yourself, another small yet beautiful moment.

"Back home, you found solace in the routine of helping us prepare meals.   We went to the gym together, the physical exertion a way to channel area energy and focus your mind, the rhythmic clang of the weights, the steady beat of your own heart, these were the sounds of your inner strength.   You were determined to build your strength and endurance and I admired your dedication.

"Since it was the winter when you came to New York, oh, how you loved the snow!   Your first instinct at seeing snow was to dive into a pile of snow and make a snow angel whilst shouting 'I love snow, I love snow'. You had a way of transforming an ordinary task into something extraordinary.    I would always step a step back and watch you in wonder, finding beauty in the simplest of things, a billion small moments of joy were a testament to your resilience, your ability to find beauty in the world, despite the challenges, including mental health issues, you faced.

"In general, you had an incredible sense of humour, a quirky and playful way of looking at the world.      You could see the funny side of any situation and your laughter was infectious.    You loved making people laugh and you had a knack for bringing joy to those around you.     Your humour was a gift, a way of bringing light and laughter into the world.

"You were also incredibly kind and compassionate, always willing to help others in need.     You had a big heart and you cared deeply about the people in your life.     You were a loyal friend, a loving son and a true inspiration to all who knew you.

"You taught me the true meaning of empathy, of seeing the world through the eyes of others.     But the world, my dear son, did not always see your beauty, your intelligence, your kindness.     The world often focused on your differences, on the ways in which you did not conform to societal expectations and this, my son, is the greatest tragedy of all: a world so focused on conformity.

"Why, I ask myself, over and over again, why did this have to happen?    Why was my beautiful, loving son denied the support he needed to thrive?     Why do we live in a world where autistic individuals are so often marginalised and misunderstood?

"The answers, my dear son, are complex and multifaceted.     They lie in the systemic inequalities that permeate our society, in the lack of funding for autism services and those dually diagnosed with other conditions, and in the pervasive stigma that surrounds neurodiversity.     They lie in the fear of difference, the discomfort with those who do not fit neatly into predefined boxes.

"But your legacy, my son, will be one of change. Your memory will forever be a beacon of light, guiding us towards a more inclusive and accepting world, a world where every autistic individual is valued, respected and supported, a world where your light continues to shine brightly, illuminating the path towards a brighter future.   We will fight tirelessly to ensure that no other autistic or dually diagnosed individual suffers the same fate as you.     We will advocate for increased funding, for better training and for greater awareness of the unique challenges and strengths of autistic or dually diagnosed people.

"We will push for a world where neurodiversity is celebrated, not stigmatised, and where every autistic person is given the opportunity to thrive.    We will fight for a world where autistic children are not forced to fit into a mould that does not suit them, where they are not judged for their differences, where they are celebrated for their unique ways of being.

"We will fight for a world where autistic adults are given the support they need to live independently, to pursue their passions, to contribute their talents to society.   We will fight for a world where autism is not seen as a burden but as a different way of experiencing the world, a way that is just as valid and valuable as any other.    We will fight for a world where autistic individuals are not seen as less than but as fully human, deserving of love, respect and dignity.

"We will fight for a world where your memory serves as a reminder of the incredible potential that lies within every autistic individual, waiting to be nurtured and unleashed.

"My dear son, your life was a gift.    You taught me about love, compassion, patience and the true meaning of acceptance.     You showed me the beauty in diversity, the strength in vulnerability, the power of human connection.     You taught me to see the world through different eyes, to appreciate the nuances and complexities that others often miss and, though your time on this earth was tragically cut short, the impact your life had on your family in the UK, the USA, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand is immeasurable.     Your legacy will live on in the hearts of those who loved you, in the memories we cherish and in the fight for a more just and equitable world.

"I will remember all the moments we shared from when you were a child running carefree at the old castle, to young adulthood, talking and texting and simply sitting together, watching the world go by.     All the moments were precious.    A reminder of the deep bond we shared.

"You will forever be a part of me, my dear son. Your spirit lives on in every beat of my heart, in every breath I take.    You are the sun that warms my soul, the moon that guides me through the darkness.

"My dearest son, I love you beyond words.      May your soul find peace and may your legacy be one of hope, acceptance and progress.

"With eternal love, your father."

**Mr Griffin**: Please show the video montage now.

*(Video was played)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, I'm sure you will have recognised the montage played there, prepared by Christopher's mother, Julia Hopper, and that is the end of that account.

**The Chair**: I would like to thank Nyarumba Nota for a very poignant account of his son Christopher, for sharing those memories of him.   Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: We now move to the commemorative and impact statement about Keith Jason Skeet.     It's provided by Christine and Keith Skeet, his parents and also by Tara Natasha his sisters.   It will be read by Kirsty Lea on their behalf, and I will ask Kirsty to start when she is ready.

Statement of The Skeet Family read by Ms Lea
--------------------------------------------

**Ms Lea**: This is the commemorative and impact statement of Christine and Keith Skeet and their daughters Tara and Natasha, in respect of their son and brother, Keith Jason Skeet, known as Jason.

"How can you share how much you are hurting because that hurt is so deep you can't explain it.      I died that day and only a part of me lived because of the love of my daughters.     However dark it gets, I think of them. Jason always looked out for his sisters and would be angry if I also left them.

"Jason was looking forward to fulfilling his dreams. Jason shared his many hopes and dreams for the future. He had achieved one of them.     He cracked his teeth and wanted to have them capped.    He got over this fear of the dentist to achieve this, four weeks before his death.     He was elated that he had now completed his treatment.    He could not stop smiling.

"He never had the chance to go on to achieve any more of his hopes and dreams for the future as they all died with him.    Jason did not want to die.    He wanted to live and to see his daughter grow up.      Jason had so much to live for and to continue to fulfil his dreams.

"Our hearts were broken on 28 November 2001 and can never recover.    As a family, we have each had our difficulties coping, managing such a loss of a son and brother.    One of our difficulties is trying to understand and having to accept the death of Jason that could have been prevented: my son, a brother, a father, whose daughter will never be able to get to know her father.

"Mental health staff and services seem to be able to make and change the rules as they go along.    They seem to forget that the patients in their care are there for treatment and mental health patients are human beings and not a piece of garbage you just throw out when they are not mentally fit for discharge.    All mental health patients should be treated as you would like to be treated yourself.    Because I trusted the mental health system I carry the guilt with me for the rest of my life for my son's death: a son, a brother, a father who was loved by all who knew him.

"Our hearts are forever broken.

"Jason was discharged on 27 November 2001 and we lost him 28 November 2001.    I can't go more in-depth as it is too painful.

"Mrs Christine Skeet, on behalf of herself, Keith, Tara and Natasha."

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of that account.

**The Chair**: I'm very grateful to the Skeet family for that account.    It was very good of them to --

**Mr Griffin**: You are muted at the moment.    I know you're saying thank you.

**The Chair**: I was saying that I'm very grateful indeed to the Skeet family for that account.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

Chair, we now move to the final account of this hearing, and it's from Ben Jackson and it's about his brother, Edward "Ed" Jackson.       It will be read on Ben's behalf by Rachel Troup.

When Rachel is ready I will ask her to start reading.

Statement of Ben Jackson read by Ms Troup
-----------------------------------------

**Ms Troup**: "Dear Baroness Lampard,

"I am writing as requested to provide an account of the life of my little brother, Ed, who died by suicide whilst a mental health in-patient in Essex on New Year's Eve 2007.

"I will do my best to describe some of the impact that his illness, the circumstances of his death and subsequent events, up to and including my involvement in this Inquiry, have had on me.       I hope that the following also conveys the extent to which our childhood together has been a positive influence on my life.

"Edward Jackson was born in March 1989 in Ipswich, Suffolk.    He was two years my younger and, since I was born 14 days later in the month, we shared the same day of the week for our birthdays each year.     We grew up in villages in Suffolk.   For the first nine years of Ed's life, this was just north of Ipswich, where we lived in a house in a quiet cul-de-sac, off an equally quiet lane.   We went to the village primary school, which we often walked to and from together through the churchyard, which abutted our back garden.

"In our village, we learned to ride bicycles, to rollerblade, to play football.   Ed was so good at football.    He played in mid-field for a local league team and was player of the season on at least one occasion.    We played with friends in our houses and in the woods and fields around the village.     We built dens in ditches and played roller hockey and football in the road and on the verges outside our house.

"We embarked on the digging of a hole to China.      We collected conkers from the horse chestnut trees in the churchyard and cured them in vinegar or in the airing cupboard.    Ed diligently painted the glass patio doors of the dining room in mud.    We played badminton in our front garden and Ed attempted to cultivate a menagerie of wild spiders, which he numbered, in lidless margarine tubs in the back.    One day, we collected all the frogs we could find, six, to keep as pets in a sandpit that we had filled with tap water.   Us not really understanding how frogs worked and them being unable to escape, they drowned overnight.

"We set fire to anything to hand with the help of the sun and a black plastic magnifying glass. I remember Ed sitting cross legged facing a lavender bush, perfectly still surrounded by bees.   He broke his arm when he slipped out of the two big shoes I had lent him so that he could try climbing the wrong way up the slide of a climbing frame.   He made a heartfelt declaration of love for Tina Turner on the occasion of her 60th birthday.

"At some point during primary school, Edward became Eddie.   He expedited this change by insisting on us saying 'Eddie' five times for each transgression. Around the end of primary school, we moved to another village in Suffolk.   Here we attended high school from our respective ages 11 to 16.   By the end of this period he was Ed.

"Our curious fire setting graduated with us to include lighters and petrol and aerosol cans.      We invented a game called fire hockey.   We quit learning to play the piano at similar ages and before attaining any real proficiency at it, but I can remember him playing 'In the Hall of the Mountain King' on electric guitar at breakneck speed.

"Encouraged by neighbouring children, we learned to fish.   Our favourite venues included the moat of an Elizabethan hall, which was full of tench and a small slow river which was full of pike and perch.    We spent days on end at these places and the memory of them is perfect in my mind.   We saw our first kingfishers flying past us.    I remember hunkering down on the banks of the river during a summer thunder storm while Ed, unphased, looked on condescendingly.    He was brave and comfortable outdoors.

"To get to the part of the river that we knew, we had to cycle for five or six miles, which meant tying our rods to our bikes.   As we grew older, we cycled further from home and faster.    We tried to trigger 30 miles per hour speed traps on a tandem.   As the front passenger, I would try to scare him by driving up the verge or swerving wildly.    As the rear passenger, he would stand on the pedals suddenly, lifting me out of the saddle from the extra resistance.   Car drivers always seemed benevolent towards us, smiling approvingly as we inconvenienced them.

"We grew more teenaged.    We didn't always get on. Ed moved on from cycling with me to half pipes and dirt jumps.   I spent more time with my friends and less with my brother.    We developed loves of music, some of which was shared, like The Prodigy, Two Lone Swordsmen, Propellerheads.    We took my first car for a drive along roads that we used to cycle down.    We happened upon a stoat, which dropped the rabbit it was carrying and disappeared into the hedge.    We backed up and waited, and it obliged us by returning for its meal.

"To the best of my recollection, Ed started to become unwell roughly after moving schools for Sixth Form.    A year later, I left Suffolk to go to university. I was home for Christmas in my second year when Ed died. He was 18.    A policeman knocked on our door in the middle of my friends arriving for a New Year's party at my parents' house to tell us.    I remember his awkward kindness and I remember telling my friends that they would have to leave but I don't remember anything else from that evening.

"In general, my memories for the year or so prior to Ed's death are less clear than at other times in my life.    I largely absented myself from the situation at home at the time because I found it hard to be around Ed's illness.     He threatened violence and was obviously in anguish.     I also think that I suffered some temporal dissociation due to stress but I do remember some things.

"Ed told me that he appreciated the influence that my musical taste had had on him, which more than made up for his losing my CDs during in-patient stays.    I think that he stole a taxi in an effort to escape from hospital.    I think that he was stopped by the police riding his motorbike to safety up the A1.    I am so proud of him.     I am less proud of myself.

"Soon after his death, you might have found me saying that the impact of it was blunted because the person that my brother was had already been gone for some time.    I find this attitude so horribly arrogant and callous, looking back.     For years afterwards I would sometimes dream that he was still alive, returned to us after a period of being missing, but these were not happy dreams.    In them, his reappearance was to be feared because it meant a return to the stress of living with his illness.

"I had thought that I had forgiven myself for my behaviour at the time which now seems far from perfect, far from brotherly, but I wonder if that will ever really be possible.

"You do not appreciate how often people ask you if you have any siblings until you find yourself in the situation where the answer is no when once it was yes. For a while, it seemed to me that there was no good answer to this question.     One can reply no, which has the benefit of not having to explain, but the minor drawback of inviting comments about only children and the major drawback of the guilt associated with denying the existence of the person who you feel is the most deserving of it in the whole world; or one can say yes and hope that the conversation ends there.

"I find now that the least worst option is to tell the whole truth but this puts you at the mercy of the questioner's social skills or lack thereof.     I assume I will always struggle with this question to some extent.

"Some years after Ed's death, I attended the coroner's inquest into it.    I missed the first day, which included the paramedics' account of finding him, because I was working.   I do not remember thinking particularly badly on a personal level of any of the staff involved in his care that I met there.    I do remember one person attending telling me that my mannerisms reminded them of Ed.

"I never visited the ward where Ed died.     I was included in the invitation to open a brand new facility named after him, Edward House, with the promise that it would offer a safer and more therapeutic environment for the people staying there.   I must have found this mollifying but it is impossible not to think that a better tribute to his life would have been not to be learning now about all the circumstances that this Inquiry is investigating.   It seems to me that that was the implicit promise of Edward House after all and it feels to me that that promise has been broken.

"Earlier this year, I read for the first time the sentencing remarks of Mr Justice Cavanagh in R v Essex Partnership Foundation Trust from 2021.   They include this passage:

"'Each of the people to whom I will refer in greater detail in a moment, died by their own hand by hanging in one of the Trust's mental health wards but it does not follow that they really intended to commit suicide.      It is often the case that such attempts are made as a cry for help without the desire to actually die.'

"It has been nearly 17 years since Ed's death.    In that time, on occasion, I have fallen into thinking of just how desperate and desperately lonely he must have been on that New Year's Eve, Christmas time, away from home, his life in that moment presumably not looking remotely like anything he had imagined.   These thoughts had become less frequent as time passed but reading the remarks above brought them back with extra devastating meaning.

"I think that at the coroner's inquest I was told that Ed wanted to get home from hospital so that he could go fishing with his brother, but this memory is so unclear that I don't know if I trust it or not.        I do know for sure, as I write this letter, that I would very much like to go fishing with him.

"Yours faithfully, Ben Jackson."

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of that account.

**The Chair**: I am very, very grateful to Mr Jackson for that account of his brother, Edward.   Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of the evidence at this hearing.   Many difficult memories and issues have been addressed and I would like, once again, to remind those engaging with the Inquiry of the emotional support that is available.    Following the hearing, information can be found on the Inquiry website, lampardinquiry.org.uk, at the "Support" tab.

Finally, Chair, before I hand over to you I would like to thank Amanda, our evidence handler, and the team from RTS for their technical assistance with this hearing.

Thank you, Chair.

Closing remarks by The Chair
----------------------------

**The Chair**: Thank you, Mr Griffin, and I reiterate my gratitude and thanks to everybody involved in ensuring the smooth running of these hearings, including members of the Inquiry team.

We have come to the end of the Inquiry's impact and commemorative hearings and I wish to thank everyone who has engaged with these hearings and provided personal accounts and opening statements over the past three days.

The three opening statements have given me much to think about and have raised matters that I and the Inquiry team will carefully consider.   I am grateful to those representatives who made those statements for their assistance.

I wish once again to give my sincere thanks to all those who provided commemorative and impact accounts. I do not underestimate how difficult it will have been to make those contributions.   The commemorative accounts shared, in all their various formats, public and in private, not only add to our understanding but are also invaluable in drawing the attention of the wider public to the depth of tragedy in each individual loss.   These accounts are vital to the Inquiry's work.

Each commemorative account was moving and memorable. Each has captured the essence of the person who has been lost and of the impact on those who loved them.    Each story will endure in my mind and I'm sure in the minds of many others listening to these hearings.

As I said at the outset of these hearings, I have asked my Inquiry team to consider how we may gather all the accounts heard by the Inquiry and present them in a way that preserves and reflects their vital importance to the Inquiry's work and I have asked that this be done in collaboration with the families who provided the accounts.

Whether I have heard an account publicly or privately, and whether it's been pre-recorded, given live or read by someone else on your behalf, the account will form part of the evidence base of this Inquiry and, although these hearings have been virtual, they will be afforded no less weight than an in-person hearing. Indeed, virtual hearings are essential to ensure that everyone who would like to be able to provide an account has a means of doing so that is comfortable, safe and suitable for them.

Looking forward to next year, the Inquiry will hold its next set of hearings in April 2025, some details of which have already been touched upon by Mr Griffin in his opening statement, but further information will follow on the Inquiry website shortly.

I want to conclude by once again expressing my sincere thanks to all those who have been involved in these hearings and by paying tribute to their encourage and dignity.   Your account and your involvement are pivotal to the work of this Inquiry and I very much thank you for it.   Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much, Chair, and please now end the live feed.

*(1.38 pm)*

*(The Inquiry adjourned)*

