.. raw:: html

   <a id="hearing-link" href="https://lampardinquiry.org.uk/hearings/day-10-commemorative-and-impact-accounts/">Official hearing page</a>

Hearing Day 10
==============

.. raw:: html

   <details id="hearing-meta" open>
        <summary>
            <span class="open">Hide video</span>
            <span class="closed">Show video</span>
        </summary>
   <lite-youtube videoid="4NOXaC-P4Bg" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   </details>

*(10.00 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: ... Amanda, put up the photograph.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.    Now play the video.

Pre-recorded statement by Karen Michel
--------------------------------------

**Ms Michel**: Marion was born in August 1965 and grew up in Jersey in a small family which consisted of her parents and younger sister, me.      Whilst growing up, Marion enjoyed days out at the beach, playing board games and cycling with friends.    She didn't really enjoy school but passed her exams and started work in a Bank after leaving school.     Finance, maths and organisation came naturally to her.    She then worked in various office administration roles and also during some of the summer seasons worked at various hire-car companies.      Marion enjoyed office work and continued to work in these roles on and off throughout her life.     Due to her mental health and difficulties dealing with stress, eventually working became a struggle.      She subsequently enjoyed working part time as part of an organised work scheme. Her last role being in environmental health, where she enjoyed having insider knowledge about local restaurant ratings.

Marion learned to drive at 17.      She liked cars and driving, starting out with a bit of a banger then progressing quickly to a black Mini which was customised with the help of her Dad: wide wheels, bucket seats etc. Her next car was an upgrade to a turquoise VW Scirocco, which was a classic 1980s car.    She cruised round in this listening to the soundtracks of the time, Tina Turner and Dire Straits.   She was a keen driver and missed the freedom of owning a car when she lost her liberty in Essex which is explained later.

As an adult, Marion liked good food, sweet treats, beauty treatments, swimming, Pilates, sunbathing, flicking through magazines and holidays.    I often joked that she was "built for luxury".    She enjoyed family holidays, occasions and was probably happiest at these times, which she looked forward to with great excitement.   Birthdays were always celebrated with champagne, cake and a meal out.

Marion's relationship with her partner spanned some 33 years and was very important to her.    They went through some stressful, less happy periods along with the happy times, but even when their relationship changed and then ended, they were able to remain firm friends and shared a sense of humour and similar interests.

Marion was quite adventurous and travelled widely with her partner, visiting America, Canada, Dubai and most countries in Europe.    These trips were some of her happiest times.     They also enjoyed Skiing holidays.     In the early 1990s they lived with her partner's father for a while in upstate New York.     On holidays they hired or took their car wherever they were.     Marion would plan and research the best places to eat and stay and find places off the beaten track to explore.    They of course went to Las Vegas, which Marion loved.     Marion's last holiday was in 2017 to France.     Marion still had many places that she wanted to visit.

Marion loved Jersey and it was an important place to her.     She enjoyed swimming at the beach, driving to her favourite spots and cooking.     Daily routines were important to Marion and she anchored her life around these.     Marion missed her home when she eventually got transferred to Essex for her mental health.     When in Essex she even put herself through watching the TV show "The Real Housewives of Jersey" just to be reminded of the scenery and places she loved.

Marion's early adult years were blighted by Glandular Fever and then ME, which was poorly understood then.

Schizophrenia is in our family and Marion was unlucky enough to develop it, with her first diagnosis in the late 1990s.    She was noted to be in remission during her 40s.     Marion had a history of intense periods of mental illness when she would hurt herself with sharps or jumping from heights, and on two occasions hurt her partner.    Despite these incidents being very serious, often resulting in periods of time in Intensive Care and hospital, she always survived these episodes of mental illness which occurred whilst in the community. However, she also enjoyed long periods of stability when she lived life to the full.    Her relapses always came as a sad shock to everyone.

Over time, Marion understood that she found it hard to deal with stress and adjusted her life accordingly. Marion was also found to have Emotionally Unstable Personality traits when she was assessed in Essex.    She accepted this and I think this helped her to make some sense of her past episodes when her mental health deteriorated, and the effect this had on her level of functioning.

Marion liked to follow a routine and was a natural organiser with a flair for maths and budgeting.     She was forthright about what she wanted and could sometimes be impatient and impulsive.     Marion would set her heart on certain things and would look forward to them intensely. She wasn't one to dither or change her mind.    However, she could also be flexible when plans changed, if given enough notice.   At some point Marion had an assessment for Autistic Spectrum Disorder due to scoring above average in this area in other autism indicative tests she had in Essex.    She was found not to have it, but a certain amount of rigidity was part of her personality.   She was also assessed as having difficulties with problem-solving.

In 2018, Marion was remanded in custody, in Jersey, following a serious assault on her partner.      When she was assessed by several UK experts as part of the proceedings, they took the view that Marion's mental health issues were so complex that they referred Marion for an assessment at Brockfield House, which is a forensic mental health medium and low secure inpatient unit under the care of Essex Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust.    No such provision is available in the Channel Islands.    Marion was transferred there from prison in December 2018.     She was worried about moving there and as a result hurt herself prior to the first attempt to transfer her.     She ended up in Intensive Care again, but she recovered and was eventually transferred to Brockfield House just prior to Christmas.     Following assessment, it was decided that Marion should remain at Brockfield House for treatment, under a Hospital Order with Restrictions made in September 2019.   In Brockfield House she was initially on Fuji Ward, a medium secure female ward, and then transferred to Aurora Ward, a low secure ward for both males and females in September 2021.

It was hard for Marion to lose her liberty and although she took up opportunities offered to her and got on with her life as best as she could, I have realised, since her death, how this remained difficult for her.   Marion was a fighter, always recovering from difficult periods and adapting well to her situation, however scary.   She could always count on her family to support her.   Marion's family and friends were proud of how well she settled at Brockfield House.   She had a consistently positive approach and took advantage of every opportunity, including therapy and educational courses.   She understood that this was her pathway to freedom.   Those who loved her felt that at last she was getting the help she needed and that she would be safe. Marion also came off the sleeping tablets that she had been prescribed for about 20 years, which was a significant achievement for her.

Marion had been lonely at times in her life and had struggled to feel that she fitted in.   She also had issues with fear of abandonment which manifested in some of her relationships.    Marion found it much easier to make friends in Brockfield House in Essex than she had done previously, and she formed some important new friendships there.    In Brockfield House Marion was in the daily company of women with shared experiences, such as having a diagnosis of a major mental health issue such as Schizophrenia, personality disorders as well as those having spent time in prison.    She had two or three close friends and maintained contact with one friend after they had been discharged.    Marion adapted and presented a therapeutic course alongside an OT, for other women who were reluctant to engage with staff-led therapy.    One good friend wrote that she would miss "their chats, eating Magnums on hot days and making Marion laugh".    Many patients and staff attended a memorial for her held at Brockfield after her death; she was well-liked.

Marion was both steady and excitable, very kind and generous with a lovely smile and a hearty and at-times mischievous laugh.    She will be remembered as someone who gave good advice to others, knew details of their lives and wanted them to do well.    She saw the best in people and tended not to question things, preferring to go with the flow.    This could make her a bit vulnerable at times.    She was also loyal, maintaining strong links with friends and family through phone calls and letters.

Marion was very much a big sister to me, often checking on my wellbeing and treating me to meals and gifts.   As Brockfield House was closer to my home, we were able to spend more time together, and I will treasure those memories.     Marion was also a good auntie to her niece.   She cared deeply about her elderly parents and their welfare.

Marion died on 4 March 2022 whilst an inpatient on Aurora Ward, Brockfield House.     Staff found her in her bathroom, having inflicted fatal injuries.    A narrative ruling was made by the coroner.    She died on the 19th day of a Covid-19 ward lockdown.    She had been through the whole of the pandemic at Brockfield House and was no stranger to ward lockdowns.    However, I believe that this one was different for Marion as in addition to the lockdown, she was also subjected to a lot of changes to her routines, planned important meeting dates and to her living arrangements.    I believe that cumulatively this was very stressful for Marion.

There were plans for Marion to be discharged, near to me, in August 2022.   Marion was so close to beginning an exciting new chapter in her life.     She had a lot to look forward to and live for.    She would have had continued support from us all and would no doubt have stayed in touch with her Essex friends. This has been one of the hardest things for her loved ones to accept, as we had been waiting for the day when she was discharged and we could all spend time together again, but it was not to be.

Marion's death has been a shock and has brought much sadness and changed all our lives forever.     We miss her deeply.

Below are a few of the ways in which Marion's death has had an impact on me and other friends and family:

Loss of a continuing relationship and future shared experiences of a daughter, sister, and aunt.

Dealing with the Jury Inquest process, all that goes with it and the toll it takes on loved ones.

Losing faith and trust in public bodies and "the State".   Feeling cynical about the motives of organisations when things go wrong.

Feeling that you can only "fight" so much and then having to decide what issues to take up and those that you can't stretch yourself to.

On a personal note, changes to my life in an immense way, for example, effect on employment and my ability to focus.

Having the burden of balancing the needs of the living -- elderly parents and my own immediate family -- as well as seeking justice for the person that has died.

Having to live with the fact that although positive changes have been made at the Trust because of my sister's death, the magnitude of the failings in her care is so very hard to comprehend.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we will see some more photos in a moment but may I again make clear that this was the account for Marion Michel by her sister -- in a video recorded by Karen.

I understand my first words this morning may not have been caught by the live feed and I am sorry about that.      We are very grateful for Karen's account. Amanda, would you now please put up the remaining photographs.    Thank you.

*(Photographs were displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of the account.

**The Chair**: I'd like to add to the thanks to Karen Michel for the account of her sister.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you, Chair.   In fact, now we'll take a break until 10.45.    This is to accommodate a witness and, in the interval, Chair, I know you will view a private account that has previously been submitted to the Inquiry.    So could we reconvene at 10.45.   May I make this clear, 10.45 is the time for those on the live feed.    Those watching via YouTube are subject to a 10-minute delay, so it will be ten minutes after that for those on YouTube.

Thank you very much.      10.45 for the live feed.

*(10.19 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(10.45 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, in a moment, you'll hear from Sacha Gregory, who will speak about her mother, Denise Gregory.

Sacha, hello, my name is Nick Griffin, I'm Counsel to the Inquiry, I just want to make sure you're settled and ready to start in a moment?

Yes, great.    Before you start, we're going to put up a photograph and then I'll ask you to start.    Is that okay?

Could you please, Amanda, put up the photo.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

Sacha, please start when you're ready.     I'm just going to ask that you unmute.    Someone can help you with that.     Start whenever you're ready.

Statement by Ms Gregory
-----------------------

**Ms Gregory**: Thank you so much.

This my commemorative and impact statement in respect of my late mother, Denise Gregory.     My mum, Denise Gregory died on 25 October 2004, aged 40, whilst an inpatient at the Linden Centre.     My mum died by hanging herself.   I was 15 years old.

My mum grew up with my nan, auntie and uncle.       She was born in Ipswich on 25 January 1964.     I don't know much about her childhood or early life.     These are questions I would like to ask her but I will never have the opportunity.

I grew up with my younger sister and half brother in Ipswich.    It was a difficult childhood.   I remember that my mum suffered a number of serious traumatic incidents -- and so did I -- that affected her deeply and she had her hands full with three children.

My mum, brother, sister and I moved into Chelmsford August 2003 from Ipswich, into a safe place.     I remember the day we moved to Chelmsford vividly, it was my 14th birthday.

I do not think my mother had given much thought of the move to Chelmsford.     I believe she thought it was temporary until she received a call in October 2003 to be told that her house in Ipswich was no longer our home.   It had been given away.

I saw a real decline in my mum's mental health from here, she became really depressed and withdrawn.

As a four we stayed at the shelter for several months before we were housed in a 40-foot block of flats in Meadgate, Chelmsford.     I remember not wanting to be at home.    I think this was a combination of being a teenager and because of how ill and not herself my mum was.

Now that I'm thinking about it, there were a few incidents where my mum showed unusual behaviour whilst we were at Meadgate.    I was at the front door waiting for her to answer to let me in but I could see her on the so why through the front door just sitting there ignoring me.    Another time, I opened my curtains and saw my mum sitting on the edge of the roof just staring down as if she wasn't even there.

I will never forget being so scared that I didn't even want to make a noise because I thought, if I did, I would have made her jump, as she didn't know I was there at all.     I just wanted to scream "Mum", but I know if I did, she would have fallen.     I think I knew at both these points she was completely gone.

Before she became ill, my mum took pride in her appearance.     She used to tell us not to shave the hair otherwise that it will grow back thicker and that you must pluck your hairs instead.     She went to someone who was very intricate to not looking after herself at all.

She used to have very loving ways, I have memories of being sat on her lap; she then had no fight in her and she had just totally given up.

I never saw my mum attempt to end her life, however my brother and my sister did.    They found my mum after she had jumped out the window of our flat.     She fractured her pelvis and needed skin grafts.    I don't think I will never be able to comprehend why the staff at the women's shelter housed a mother of three into a 40-foot block of flats when she was a flight risk. They were all so lovely at the centre but what risk assessment did they do?

I do not know what support, if any, she was given for her mental health before her suicide attempt.        My mum was in hospital for a little while, while she recovered, and then was transferred to the Linden Centre, where her journey got worse.     My mum did not have the confidence to fight or have any fight left in her.     She had totally given up.

My brother and my sister moved back to Ipswich.        My sister moved in with a family friend and my brother went to live with my step dad.     I was placed in a children's home.

I would visit my mum on my own when she was in the Linden Centre and she had no life in her.    She once just sat there and said, "Sacha, can you put your hands around my neck and just kill me?"    I was 14 years old and the nurses at the Linden Centre would reassure me that my mum would be okay.

My mum absconded whilst at the Linden Centre and was gone for hours.     She had made her way to the train station.   That was one time I was really scared.

On 25 October 2005 my nan received a call from the hospital and was told that my mum had passed away. I was hysterical.    The Linden Centre allowed me, at the age of 15 to see my mum.     She had hung herself.   When I arrived at the hospital, she was still on some kind of life support.     They told me that she has gone, but not fully gone.

I remember her almost looking like a zombie, her eyes weren't open but she was bloodshot all over her body.   I laid my head on her stomach and felt her pulsating, and three memories of us flashed before my eyes.   I couldn't believe that it was even my mum.     If I close my eyes, I can still see my mum.

I truly believe you never forget the footprints that follow you as a child.    I continued to live in the children's home until I was placed into a foster home at the age of 16.    I got my flat at the age of 17 and a half on good merit and still live in this flat today at the age of 35.

I feel as though I shouldn't be giving this account as my mum should be here, I should still have my mum. Had my mum not have been failed, I believe my life would be a different one.   As an adult, that's what I think is really sad: that I never had any option to do anything with her.   I never got to experience a mother and daughter relationship.

I recently found an article dated 2006, and I'm relieved that I never saw this as a teenager.   The information is untrue.   My mother's date of death is wrong and it states as her being a drug addict.      When she moved from Ipswich she was not on drugs.    She done the rehab for a better life.   The article insinuates that my mother's tragedy would have happen anyway.     My birthday is a bigger trigger point for me as this was the day we moved to Chelmsford.   It's not only a bigger reminder of what I had but also of what I lost and what I should have.

It feels I have woken up in my 30s and I am now remembering all that I have been through.   I am now reliving through the Inquiry all of the years between the day my mother died until now.   The Inquiry is bringing all of the suppressed trauma to the surface. New memories have been unlocked, including my fears.

It is only since I started therapy that I have been able to talk.    Therapy has given me a wider outlook on my life and future.    Therapy has made me realise, due to the failings that occurred in my mum's life, I now fear having my own kids, the reason being that I now have no faith in the mental health service, and so I would want -- I would not want to risk my kids having to access mental services and have to go through what I have been through.   My mum is gone but I am still trying to live my life and it's only through my own strength that I am here today.

I am really proud of myself.    I may seem outgoing but sometimes I'm a prisoner to myself.   I'm unable to hold down a job.   I am a qualified personal trainer but I struggle how I can relate to people and what they are going through.   I take it home and it becomes a constant memory of what I've been through.

I'm learning so much about myself but, at the stage of -- but at the age of 35 I feel I should be more.    The person I am when I wake up is not the same person I am by the time I go to the kitchen.    I have been diagnosed with anxiety and ADHD and I'm on anti-depressants.     I am going through a healing process right now.   The breakdown in my relationship triggered me to go into counselling.    I have been going to therapy once a week for the last 14 months and I talk a lot about my childhood and my mum.    I did not realise how blasé I described my life, it is only until recently that I became aware of what I've been through and how awful and differently it really is.

I feel as though I am now strong to deal with the trauma and take part in this Inquiry.

When I was invited to give this commemorative account, I wrote down four points on how my mum's death has affected me.

1.     It's broken up my family, my past relationships and my relationships in life and work.

2.    The attachments I have with people.

3.     My own mental health has been damaged.

4.    The what-ifs in my life, the things I could have done with my life that I will never know about missing what you don't know.

Due to my mum's death, I was an angry teenager, I now feel that I am a broken adult.    I'm the shell of a person I could be and this Inquiry is not just for me, it's for the -- for what they did and what they are still doing to other families.

**Mr Griffin**: That's the end of Sacha's account.

**The Chair**: Sacha, can I thank you very much indeed that account.

**Ms Gregory**: Thank you, thank you.

**The Chair**: It's obviously not been easy, but we are very, very grateful to you and you've done an excellent job. Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: The next account will be read by Counsel to the Inquiry, Rachel Troup.    It's the commemorative account of Samantha Reains for her uncle, Keith Stubbings.

Before Rachel reads the account, Amanda, would you please put up the photograph first.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you, and Rachel, please start when you're ready.

Statement of Samantha Reains by Ms Troup
----------------------------------------

**Ms Troup**: "Samantha Reains, commemorative statement for my uncle, Mr Keith Stubbings, 12 May 1957 to 24 April 2019.

"My uncle was the most gentle, loving and sensitive person that I have ever met.     He was incredibly strong in personality and everyone who met or knew him spoke highly of the man he was.

"My uncle was born on 12 May 1957 to his proud parents and extended family.     As a baby, he lived with his mum, dad and grandparents in a small house built by his grandad in Broomfield Chelmsford.

"All of his aunts and uncles loved him and enjoyed helping to look after him.     His parents were so proud of their beautiful, healthy, baby boy.

"Eighteen months after his birth, his parents welcomed another child, Keith's sister.   At this point, they moved to a house, still within Broomfield, where his parents had more room for their developing family. My uncle in total had one brother and three sisters, all living at home with their doting parents.

"As Keith was the eldest, he would help look after his siblings.    He would take his sisters fishing, always showing a loving and caring attitude.   Keith was part of the choir at Broomfield church.   He progressed to be the head choirboy, which was something he was immensely proud of.    He would also be the person who was asked to carry the cross during ceremonies.    Such a big responsibility, which he fulfilled.

"As my Uncle Keith got older, he wanted to experience other fun things, such as going to football matches with his mates every Saturday, bringing home memorabilia of his team, West Ham.

"My uncle also loved reading and this was a hobby he continued through all of his life.    Maybe, within books, he could transport his mind to other places.

"Keith was also keen to work, starting at the age of 11 years old, where he took on a paper round.      He then moved on to retail work, making suits at Burton's Tailors.    He would measure customers for their suits in preparation for them to be purchased.    My uncle's nan bought him his first suit, of which he was so proud.

"My uncle's dream was to one day be a train driver. He accomplished this dream from when he first drove passenger trains to then freight trains, which he did until he left this world.

"The 3 August 1981 was a day when my uncle's life changed dramatically.     On this day, his father passed away in a road traffic accident.    This was the biggest shock and the most devastating news to all of our family, especially my uncle, as he was supposed to be going with his father that day, a thing that he lived with all of his life, questioning why it happened and would it have been different if he had gone with him?

"This event is where we believe my uncle's mental ill health started from.     We believe he kept this awful event inside, eating away at him.    He felt that he had to now be the head of the family, as he was the eldest sibling, a role he was afraid of and too young to take on.

"As my uncle's life went on, some traits of mental ill health became apparent.    At times, he would become distant from his family, worry about others having traffic accidents, people leaving him, and that he was not worthy of any love.

"He struggled with these thoughts until he had a breakdown in 1999.    My uncle initially took on some private counselling, which was ended before he felt he was better.     My uncle asked to continue with this, but they refused.

"He was eventually referred for assessment under the NHS from 2003 to 2006, which included cognitive behavioural therapy, family therapy and behavioural psychotherapy.    My uncle was diagnosed with depression in 2000 and depression and anxiety in 2003.    He attended all available treatments and also agreed to some medications to help with his dark moods.    He even explained that he wanted the anger management courses to continue but these were taken from him.

"In March 2019, my uncle attempted to take his own life.   He was hospitalised for this in Broomfield Hospital, Mayflower Ward.

"At this time, being in hospital, he said that he felt safe as there were people looking after him.     The ward staff spoke to my uncle and asked how he was.    My uncle explained that he had been feeling very down at the moment, as his marriage had recently broken down. They then contacted the mental health team at the Linden Centre who came to see my uncle.     The following day, the hospital discharged my uncle as they needed the bed and said that he could manage his injury at home.    Once more, my uncle asked if he could stay, as he felt safe in the hospital.

"The hospital refused and then allowed him to walk home from Broomfield Hospital to Springfield where he lived, approximately three miles along very busy roads and also alongside a river.   In my uncle's state of mind, he could have done anything to himself on this journey.

"Keith then had his family with him each day, trying to help him rebuild his health and life, which was a struggle, as he did not see that anything good or positive would ever happen for him.

"The mental health team tried to call him and, on a couple of occasions tried to visit him at home. Obviously, for somebody with a past like my uncle's, eg diagnosed depression, therapies and an attempt to end his life, more care should have been in place.

"My uncle never answered his phone as he slept all day, but yet no further action was taken by the mental health team.   On the odd occasion that they called to his house, my uncle would come to his window, looking dishevelled and unkempt, but yet they still took no action.    One time, when my aunt was at the house, the mental health team visited.   They came in and spoke to my uncle.   When my aunt asked about the possibility of him returning to work, the mental health member smirked as if to mock my uncle.

"On 24 April 2019, my Uncle Keith took control of his life and decided to end it.    He locked himself away so nobody else was affected until the time came that my husband sadly found his body.    My Uncle Keith was let down by so many people, doctors, nurses, mental health teams and Broomfield Hospital.    Although, in the end, he took the control back and did what he needed to do and I am so proud of him.

"After my uncle's death, the Linden Centre contacted me as they were holding an investigation into his care. I went to all of the meetings held at the Linden Centre, and was told by a highly qualified individual that 'We could have brought Keith here but he still would have done what he did'.

"This broke my heart, as I realised there and then that nobody was going to help my Uncle Keith.

"One main outcome to the investigation was for the mental health team to communicate with the patient's family members to also discuss about medications and ensure that they are being taken regularly.    None of this happened for my Uncle Keith.

"To end this statement, I want to express how hard it was for my Uncle Keith.       He could not carry on in the torment he was in.        I believe that he was severely let down by Broomfield Hospital, doctors and nurses, and also the mental health team based at the Linden Centre. They all knew my Uncle Keith's mental health background, also what he did to try to take his own life.        But yet they did nothing to keep him safe.

"Sleep well, Uncle Keith, until we meet again and I get that big hug from you.        All our love, your proud family."

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of Samantha's account.

**The Chair**: I hope someone will pass on my thanks to Ms Reains for her very moving account of her uncle.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.    We now hear from Emma Cracknell, who is speaking about her mother, Susan Spring.        May I ask first that the photograph is put up, please.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.        Amanda, can you play the video, please.

Pre-recorded statement by Emma Cracknell
----------------------------------------

**Ms Cracknell**: My name is Emma Cracknell and I am the daughter of Susan Spring who sadly lost her life on 1 February 2012.

My Mum, Susan Spring, was a confident, caring and loving person.     The reason I use confident to describe my Mum is due to her amazing courage that she had, at such a young age of 18, to leave a loving family in Gloucestershire where she was born, to follow in her grandfather's footsteps and join the metropolitan police force.    She left home to attend Hendon to train to be a WPC and patrol the streets of London.   I am ever so proud of her and to have been able to say that she was my Mum.

As her only child and daughter our relationship was like no other which is why I feel so let down by the services that supported my Mum as I was asking for help and no one was listening.

My Mum was so strong and only in those last days I knew what mental health was and how badly it can affect somebody as my Mum was no longer my Mum but an anxious and concerned person who was not getting the care she needed.   The closest people near to her were not supported and their views were not recorded.

I feel that my Mum required sectioning after her first attempt, which was in its very own act, more than a cry for help.    My question has always been: what more did she need to do to have been sectioned?   When does the decision get taken from a person that so obviously is unable to keep themselves safe at that moment in time?

What more would she have needed to have done: the first attempt was so severe?     How was it not enough to have required sectioning -- and an assessment from a trained psychiatrist -- but deemed fit to return Home to a partner that had not been assessed and a daughter that had not even been spoken to.

Sadly, I am left with lots of unanswered questions regarding the care my Mum was not given and I hope that this inquiry improves the service that loved ones rely on so much when in crisis.

**Mr Griffin**: Please show the final photos, thank you.

*(Photographs were displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the final photograph and the end of that account.

**The Chair**: Again, we're very grateful to Susan Spring (sic) for contributing as she has.

**Mr Griffin**: We will next see the account of Paul Steel about his son, Adam Steel.    First of all, I ask that the photograph is put up, please.

While that's being prepared, I will ask that, immediately after the photograph is put up, that the video is played.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Pre-recorded statement by Paul Steel
------------------------------------

**Paul Steel**: Adam was 36 when he passed away on 14 October 2021 in the Peter Bruff unit at Colchester Hospital.     It was sudden, unexpected and somewhat unexplained.

He had been blighted with bipolar disorder since his late teens.    Although he suffered with bouts of depression interspersed with the occasional manic episode he didn't allow the chronic condition to define his life.

In fact, to his credit, he managed to hold down a full time job as a leisure attendant and swimming teacher from the time he left school up until his passing with very few periods of absence from work.

He was also in remission from testicular cancer.     He took everything in his stride with very little fuss in relation to his health issues.

Adam had his demons and was afflicted with a gambling addiction for most of his adult life. Although this was the cause of great consternation, he always received the support of his loving family.

He also struggled with his weight, something which he was trying to address at the time of his passing.

As a person Adam was a larger than life character who was the life and soul of the party with a great sense of fun and mischief.    He made us all laugh and would strike up a conversation with anyone.

His great passion in life was Tottenham Hotspur football club where he had been a member and season ticket holder since the age of six.

He leaves behind his loving wife, who he had been with for ten years and married for three.

His sister, Sophie, wanted to share these thoughts:

"Growing up with Adam we always had a close bond and through the years we would go out and socialise together, speak on a daily basis and always texting. I miss sharing stuff with him like siblings do.     Since his passing my life feels like there is a massive void, life isn't the same.   I find it devastating that he has missed out on seeing my little boy, growing up.     Adam had 2 years of being in his life and in that time he was a devoted uncle and really did dote on him, always taking him to the park or for days out.   Adam would have absolutely loved him now and his fun character.    Life will never be the same again since losing Adam, he was such a special person with a big personality.     He was so kind and thoughtful and would always make people laugh. I miss so much about him and his presence in our family life."

Both his Mother and I miss him dearly.    He used to visit a couple of times each day and was always on the phone or texting us.    He would bring in errands and a newspaper, we affectionately nicknamed him "The paper boy" It's very strange no longer hearing the back gate open and him striding up the garden path to the kitchen door.

His passing has left a huge hole in all our lives, one that can't be filled.    They say that time is a great healer, but I am not so sure.

We are all struggling to come to terms with his loss at such a young age.    It's as though a bright, shining light has been switched off and plunged us into darkness.

It was testament to his popularity and the love for him, that on the day of his funeral people were queuing outside the chapel to pay their last respects to Adam. The celebration of a life cut short was continued at Harlow Town FC.

His 2 sets of friends from Waltham Abbey and Loughton organise a memorial charity football match every year in his honour.

Although he has departed, Adam is always in our hearts and mind will never be forgotten.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of that account.

**The Chair**: My thanks to Paul Steel.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we now take a break for 20 minutes.   So back at 11.35 for those on the live feed.      Thank you very much.

*(11.16 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(11.35 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, the next account is about Angela Ling. It's provided by her mother, Christine Pitt and friend David Oldershaw.   It is being read by Richard Hyland. Please play the video now. Pre-recorded statement of CHRISTINE PITT and DAVID OLDERSHAW

read by MR HYLAND

**Mr Hyland**: This pen portrait of Angela Ling is spoken on behalf of her mother, Christine Pitt.

My daughter, Angela, was born on 12 October 1972. A baby sister to her older brother Martin, she was a happy baby who grew into a happy little girl.      She enjoyed playgroup and later school.      She did well at primary school and had lots of friends, was always enthusiastic to join activities.       She played netball, sang in the choir, did swimming, country dancing and played Nancy in the school production of Oliver.      She later learned disco dancing, gaining many medals.      She had a happy secure childhood with both parents and always enjoyed her time spent with much loved grandparents.    She was very able at school and did well at primary school, however, her time at secondary school was not so productive.   Although very able, she lost interest in school during her teenage years.    She did gain some qualifications though.    A few GCSEs and a couple of A levels.

She didn't want to go to uni, and instead worked in the care sector with adults with learning difficulties. She then decided that she would gain some further education and completed an open university degree in social sciences.

During her studies she became very unwell with a neurological condition.    After a couple of years and many hospital appointments she was referred to the national neurological hospital in London and eventually diagnosed with a severe vitamin B12 deficiency causing total fatigue, vertigo, and right sided weakness.     She even had to take her final degree exam at home with an invigilator present as she needed rest breaks.     Such was her determination to pass.     Her health did improve to a degree with lifelong B12 injections, although she did have periodic ongoing related problems.

She continued her career working at a secure unit with children and young people who had come to the attention of the law and were very damaged.     The work was often challenging and harrowing.    She also worked at a probation service.

It was around this time that she met and later married her husband Andy, and it wasn't long before they started a family.   She had four beautiful children, Jack, Abbie, William and Ethan.   They were all very close in age and they were her absolute world.    As she had young children, she decided to embark on a teaching career as she felt this would be more family friendly. She did a post-graduate degree in teaching, only completing her final school placement when her youngest baby was just a few months old.

She went on to teach in a primary school for some years, eventually making the move to become a specialist educator adviser for the youth offending team for the Essex County Council, teaching young people who had made, for a variety of reasons, not fared well in the main stream schools.   She was an excellent teacher and well-liked by her students and colleagues.

There is so much to tell about my dear Angie.      She was kind, generous, clever, bubbly and fun.   She was feisty, tenacious, and held strong opinions and was well educated entirely by her own determination.     Following on from previous qualifications she went on to get a masters in law and a masters in psychology.    She was still studying the further qualifications in education at the time of her death.    She was also very empathetic, especially to those worse off than herself.       She would always speak to the homeless, give money, food or a blanket, whatever she had at the time, and she was friendly and hospitable and a number of friends of her own and would always welcome many of the children's friends into their family home, sometimes for extended periods.

She was a great animal lover and had been a vegetarian since she was 13 and the last few years, a veracious vegan.    She had many pets.     The children, of course, had the usual hamsters, rabbits etc.      My daughter loved her dogs and at one time had 11 dogs and 5 cats.

As you could tell she could be quite extreme at times.    She had a full-time job, additional private tutoring, running the home and looking after four children did take its toll on her.     All this whilst studying for further qualifications.       So life for her was extremely busy.    She did get very stressed, understandably so, and had periods of depression.       She always made light of this and I didn't think she was ever seriously depressed although I did constantly advise her to ease back but she went her own way. Angela was never a person to do things by halves.        In her own words "you know me mum, I'm all or nothing".

She was a loving mum and fiercely protective of her children, her family, her home but most of all, her children were everything to her. She had, in the past, talked of looking ahead to her retirement years. She told me she just wanted to potter in her home, tend to her garden, grow herbs and vegetables.    She had talked of wanting to extend the family home so that her children could bring their children to family events. She recently said she wanted to travel and have family holidays.     However, tragically this future was not meant to be.

Above all she was our beautiful, precious, irreplaceable daughter and we loved her beyond measure. Our hearts have been shattered into a thousand pieces because she deserved better and so much longer.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of the account.

**The Chair**: Well, I want to thank Angela's family, her mum Christine, and her friend Dave, who, along with the councillor, helped to prepare this account of Angela's deeply impressive life.     Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: We will hear now the account of Joanne Woolley, it's about her father, Norman Dunkley and it will be read by Counsel to the Inquiry, Kirsty Lea.

Kirsty, please start when you're ready.

Statement of Joanne Woolley read by Ms Lea
------------------------------------------

**Ms Lea**: The commemorative statement of Joanne Woolley regarding Norman Noah Dunkley.

"My father, Norman Noah Dunkley, was born on 8 October 1931 in Loughton, Essex.     He grew up with a strong work ethic, which defined much of his life.

"My dad, Norman, grew up in Chingford with his mum, dad, and three sisters, Hattie, Jean and Audrey.      My dad was also brought up with animals -- dogs, chickens, rabbits, guinea pigs -- which he used to help his dad look after.

"This dad had horses that they would ride and also drive in a horse and cart.    My Auntie Jean said they were the original Darling Buds of May, like the television programme.   As my dad grew older he said he would like a small farm of his own.

"While my dad was out one night in the pub, the Fox & Hounds, Sewardstone Road, he met my mother, Patricia Dunkley.    They had a short courtship and got married in 1968 and built a life together at Oak Farm where they raised my sister, Sharon, and me.

"My mum and dad decided they would like their own property as they were living with my grandparents.      So my dad had been working as a forklift driver and saved all of his money so he could buy a small holding in High Beech, where he and my mum could live with my sister.

"When my dad bought the farm, there was nothing there, just 14 acres of pasture land.      So my dad went to the local council and asked them for planning permission, and they said he could put a caravan on the land to live in for him and his family, which he did.

"The farm is what can best be described as an isolated farm on 14 acres of pasture land, with a bungalow built in the late 1970s.   It was not just a family home but the heart of my father's life's work. My parents worked hard to develop the farm, turning it into a thriving business with horses, pigs, sheep and cattle.

"The farm was the primary source of income, and my father would often turn the cattle out on the forest to preserve his pastures.   In March 1970, I was born, Joanne.    My dad was still a forklift driver and now there were four of us living in a caravan.      My dad started to get some animals on the farm: he had pigs, horses, sheep rabbits and goats.

"My sister and I used to help our dad look after the animals.   As we got bigger we loved it: we had horses that we used to ride.    It was idyllic.

"As things progressed, Mum and Dad decided they would like to build a bungalow for us all to live in, so dad went to the council and asked for planning permission as we had lived in the caravan for nine years, and it was granted.     So Dad built the bungalow, also stables to rent out for horses, with my mum right by his side helping all the way.

"My dad then bought cattle for beef, which he would graze out on the local forestry and then take them to market for beef cattle.     This is how my mum and dad made their living, with my dad renting stables out for horses and taking the cows to market.     My mum used to do all the book work for the farm and also look after us all.

"My mum and dad loved living in High Beech as my dad now had what he always wanted.     Sharon and I had a lovely upbringing and she wants to be part of this story as well, like also Paul Dockley(?) is such a big part of our story.

"Paul has known my dad for 60 years and we look at Paul like a brother.   Paul wanted to be part of this statement too and help write this statement.

"In 1962, our father hired a then young Paul Dockley.   Paul cared for and rode our father's horses, and over a period of 60 years he would become a close family friend and a reliable source of support.       I would say that our father wasn't the easiest man to deal with at the best of times, though Paul was able to act as an intermediary on occasions in which our father would disagree with my sister and I, as he had known and accommodated our father's strong viewpoints since before we were born.

"My sister and I spent all our childhood through to adulthood on the farm. Oak Farm was a place of warmth and hard work.   My sister and I grew up alongside the animals, spending our days exploring the fields, learning about farming, and being surrounded by nature. We built many happy memories.

"My sister, Mrs Sharon Anne Bramman, wanted to say the following:

"'I am the eldest daughter of me and my sister. Growing up on Dad's farm was lovely childhood memories. I would go with him mostly everywhere, for example, to collect the hay and straw for the farm for the horses and cows he had, and go to the market with him to sell the cows he had brought up.   The highlight of going to the market was to get a sausage roll with him.   Another one was he would ride his pushbike and I would ride my horse and he would follow behind so I could take the horse out for a ride.   And another one, he would take me and my sister and mum to the Ridgeway Park on a Sunday afternoon, and we would go on the rides.'"

That's the end of the words from Mrs Sharon Anne Bramman.

"As our parents got older, it was evident they would need to be cared for.   They had cared for Sharon and I, so there was no question in our minds that we would do the same.   We agreed that I would be the primary carer for our mother and, latterly, our father during the week and, at weekends, my sister would cover to provide me with some respite.

"In 2000, our mother was diagnosed with lung cancer, which she endured for 10 years until she passed away in 2010.

"Within weeks of getting the news of Mum's illness, I decided to do reduced hours at work, so I could look after Mum and be there for Dad, as he was devastated at the thought of Mum being ill, as we all were.

"I cared for Mum for 10 years, going to every hospital appointment and doctor's appointment with her, and then nursing Mum at home with palliative care.

"Our mother's passing left our father deeply heartbroken and lost.   Their marriage had been a strong partnership and, without her, he struggled to adjust. Nevertheless, he continued to live at Oak Farm, determined to maintain the life they had built together from nothing.

"My dad was so lost when my mum passed away.    She was the love of his life.   That's what he said.      They were always together and worked hard.    They loved living in High Beech, and all that they had achieved, to build a bungalow and to bring me and my sister up.    We are a very close family and always looked after each other. We couldn't have had a better mum and dad.     That's why, when Mum passed away, I knew Dad wouldn't cope.       So I would go every day and cook and clean for him, and make sure he was okay and, at the weekend, my sister, Sharon, used to go while I was at work.    But, although he had me and Sharon, he was still lonely, and missed Mum terribly, and never got over Mum passing away.

"Up until his early 80s, my father successfully held the reins on running Oak Farm.    However, over the next decade, his health began to decline.    He suffered a triple heart bypass in 2005 which marked a significant turning point in his ability to manage the farm. Although his mind was still sharp, physically he could no longer work as he once had.

"I took on the role of his primary caregiver, travelling by bus and bike, as I did not drive, to the farm every day to cook for him, manage the house and the farm's administrative tasks.     On weekends, Sharon would help to relieve me.

"As time went on, Dad's health deteriorated.       He had already suffered a triple heart bypass back in 2005.     We think that was the stress of Mum being diagnosed with lung cancer.

"I was devastated when Mum passed away.      We were so close.   We would be together all the time.    She was a lovely, caring Mum to me and Sharon.    I found it hard when Mum passed, as I did everything for Mum and it left a big hole in my life.   Mum said to me, 'Look after Dad when I pass away', and I said of course we would, as Dad couldn't cope without Mum.     She did everything for him. He was not used to being on his own.

"As his health continued to deteriorate, my father began to experience mood swings and confusion.     It became increasingly difficult to care for him.     Looking after my dad was not easy but we loved him and would not see him being not cared for.    As time went on, my dad's health got worse, and I was with him every day, helping to dress and wash, as he was unable to do this for himself.

"Then, the unacceptable became the acceptable, as how could I leave him to care on his own, because clearly he couldn't cope?    In 2019, we noticed a marked deterioration in our father's mental health.    One incident that particularly stands out was when he started seeing people riding horses around the paddock close to the house at night.     To allay his fears, we installed a CCTV system but he was still adamant that there were people outside the house, when the CCTV showed evidence to the contrary.     Sadly, these hallucinations continued time and time again in our father's mind.

"His hallucinations grew more frequent and he would sometimes call the police late at night, convinced that intruders were trying to harm him.     He would explain to them that sirens should not be used on their arrival but, when of the police arrived with sirens, he would say the people, in his hallucinations, had disappeared.

"By October 2021, our father's condition had worsened significantly.     One night, he went outside during the night and fell, spending hours lying outside the bungalow, unable to get up.    The following morning my husband and I rushed to the farm after my father had managed to call.   I was visiting him as I did every day. He had not been able to get into the bungalow.      So my husband and I got him in and settled him and I stayed with him to make sure he was okay.

"There was another incident, the last one when my father had been up all night saying people were trying to kill him, and he locked himself in and he called me from his phone indoors.     I don't know how he remembered my number, because he was in a state when I arrived, claiming that people were in the house and were trying to blow it up and kill him.   When we arrived, my father was locked inside and unable to get to the front door, so I managed to get him to open a window and then I climbed inside.

"It was devastating to see, his eyes were black and he was covered in sweat as he had obviously been up all night panicking, thinking these people were going to blow up the property.   He looked so ill.   It was evident that all he reported was a figment of his imagination.

"We eventually calmed him down and rang for an ambulance.   My sister also came up to the farm.   The ambulance advised my father needed to go to hospital. He was taken to Whipps Cross Hospital, where we waited for 15 hours in Casualty, where several doctors saw him. The doctors initially wanted to send him home but, on my insistence that he needed to stay overnight, they agreed.

"The next day, he underwent further assessment by a member of the mental health team who diagnosed him with Lewy body dementia and said that he was more ill than he presented.   Our father was then moved to the mental health unit at St Margaret's Hospital in Epping. During this time, our father kept talking about his property having been blown to smithereens and people from his past who had died.

"This was an incredibly difficult time for our family, as it was the beginning of the Covid-19 lockdown and we were not permitted to visit him.   Once the restrictions were lifted, we were able to visit him again.   When Dad was hospitalised at St Margaret's, Epping, it was mid-October 2021.   We visited him regularly every week and weekend, up until January 2022. Then lockdown began and we could only speak to him on the phone, which was very distressing for our dad and us as well.

"Dr Chiraz(?), mental health doctor, rang my sister and said that Dad was diagnosed with vascular dementia. We asked for a meeting which took place early December. In January 2022, we had a meeting with Adult Social Work and Care.    Our dad was moved into a home as they said he was not palliative care.    He was in the home a week, Wensley House, Epping, and Dad passed Tuesday, 15 March 2022.    Dad's one wish he always wanted was to pass away at home, which was Oak Farm, Essex, which he was denied, as they said he wasn't palliative care.

"It was evident that there was significant deterioration in our father's physical condition and wellbeing.   His mobility was reduced and he had become withdrawn.

"After a month of being in hospital, I received a call from the occupational therapist treating our father to consider our father's future care and whether he could return home to Oak Farm or be accommodated in a care home.   I knew for certain that my father wanted to return to the place he loved most, the farm.     Despite expressing our and our father's wishes for him to return home, he was moved to Princess Alexandra Hospital in Harlow.    I was never told why he was moved to this hospital, and it only added to our sense of confusion and frustration.

"Throughout this period, we struggled to find clarity about his care.     Despite raising concerns about his mental and physical welfare, it felt like his wishes were not being fully considered.     In late 2021, a mental health doctor at St Margaret's advised he should into a care home.   It was clear from the symptoms my father was displaying for many months now that he was not receiving the correct care and was becoming very insular.   This was heartbreaking to see.

"Paul and I attended a meeting with the doctor regarding my father's care.    We raised several issues, including his mental welfare and medical care.    I also asked about palliative care, having been through the process whilst caring for our mother.    However, we were told he was not a case for palliative care and a care home would be the best option.   This was disheartening, as we felt it would have been the best option for his dignity and comfort towards the end of his life.

"In January 2022, Sharon, Paul and I attended a meeting with an Adult Social Care representative.      She raised the issue of social care for people at St Margaret's Hospital but, once again, there was no option in relation to palliative care.    My family wanted our father to return home with support, as this would have suited him best, but this option was never discussed or encouraged.

"We left that meeting feeling further confused and concerned.   On Monday, 7 March, my father was taken from St Margaret's to Wensley House care home.   Sharon and I went to see him on the Tuesday and it was clear that his condition had worsened.   He was uncommunicative and physically frail.    It was heart wrenching to see him in such a state.

"Finally, the head nurse agreed that he should be administered palliative care and, in consultation with the doctor, it was agreed that the process of palliative care should be initiated immediately but this was actioned too late.

"We had one weekend where all my father's family and friends came to see him and, on Tuesday, 15 March 2022, he passed away.    Although his final days were difficult, we are comforted by the fact that he was surrounded by those who loved him.    It pains me that it took so long for medical professionals to respect our father's wishes to return home where he could end his life in the place he loved with dignity.

"Our father was a man of strength, pride, and dedication.     Oak Farm remains a testament to his life's work and the love he poured into every aspect of it.     We miss him deeply but his memory lives on in the fields, the animals and the home he cherished so much."

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of that account.

**The Chair**: I'd like to thank Joanne, and she mentioned also Sharon and Paul for that account of Norman, which was very touching.   Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: We're now going to hear about Andrew Pooley, in an account provided by his brother and sister-in-law, Tim and Mary Pooley.    Chair, as you'll see, Tim and Mary's daughter, Keziah also provides her account. Before we hear that, may I ask that the photo is put up, please.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.   Please play the video.

Pre-recorded statement by Tim and MARY POOLEY
---------------------------------------------

**Tim Pooley**: My Brother, Andrew, was born in 1976 to an Irish family.     His parents both had significant learning difficulties.     Andrew and his two siblings were made wards of court and were each fostered separately across England.     Andrew was taken by my parents, Jean and Don, when he was only 10 days old.     My parents by that point had already short term fostered over 100 children.     At the time, they lived in Kent.   They moved to Wales when Andrew was about ten years of age.

Before Andrew had turned ten, he had already been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and having a learning age of only six.    I had left home to get married when Andrew was only seven but maintained excellent relations with my parents and Andrew.      Whilst at a special school, Andrew had a friendship with a young girl who had similar learning problems.     We later learned that she was the daughter of a famous TV producer.    Unfortunately, Andrew suffered a serious incident while at school, so was withdrawn from the school.     As soon as Andrew turned 18 years of age and was no longer a ward of court, my parents formerly adopted him.

During Andrew's teenage years and into his 20s, his illness made him progressively violent, not towards my parents or other people but by destroying personal effects in the home.    My parents maintained an extraordinary level of patience towards him.       They recognised that it was only his illness that caused him to act in such a manner and appreciated that he was a loving and loveable young man.

The NHS attempted to treat Andrew with a variety of drugs, each with varying rates of success.       Before he turned 30, he was successfully titrated on to an anti-pyschotic drug.

It became possible to get a glimpse of the man he truly was.

This had the desired effect of:

Releasing him from the frightening mental images he had, caused by paranoia.

Enabling him to remain calm and non-violent.

Stopping his physical ramblings and vocal utterances that arose out of anxiety and frustration.

Not many people knew Andrew very well, as he was shy and retiring, keeping himself to himself.    For much of his life he would only venture out of the house with my dad.     Those that knew him referred to him as a gentle giant.

One doctor called him a real gentleman.    Although he could not stay in a social situation for long, he could at least follow the usual social niceties whilst meeting other people.     He would then need to withdraw in to his own private space.    All this was a marked changed in his capacity to handle social situations and to control his behaviour.

Following my father's death in May 2012, we were all concerned as to how Andrew and my mum would be able to continue living independently in Wales.    He had only made toast, cereal and gallons of Nesquik beforehand. The day following the funeral, with knowledge gained from watching cookery programmes, he made a dinner including both fish and sausages.    It wasn't long before he was stripping a full chicken to make a curry, and even prepared his own chicken Kievs.     He undertook many other household jobs.     He started venturing out on long walks and making use of buses.     He achieved all sorts of new goals.   He became more self assured and independent.

My mother and Andrew tried to continue living at the family home in Wales, but by the end of 2013, it was becoming clear that they were finding it too difficult to maintain the house.    My mother had significant health problems and it was too much to expect Andrew to cope with her needs.     I made arrangements for both of them to move permanently to Witham in Essex, within walking distance of my own home.     I found a modern rented ground floor flat that was large and comfortable for them both. On the moving day, Andrew wore his favourite shirt and said that he was returning to his native land, having been born in Greenwich.     He walked through the new flat in Witham and told us that he loved it and it was just like a dream.

Andrew started walking around the town, visiting shops and cafes, some food shopping etc.     I visited them twice a day to ensure they both had had their own respective medications, had sufficient meals and similar.   I would do some shopping for them, take them out for a walk whilst pushing my mother in a wheel chair, go out occasionally in the car etc.     He came out of his shell more and more.     He was an incredibly contented and cheerful soul, in spite of being very aware of his illness and condition.     We recall a visit to Heybridge Basin, which he adored.     On returning to the car, he said that he had seen places like this on TV, but never imagined he would see such a place with his own naked eye.   Just prior to his death, we were traveling in the car to London to see our aunt.        He spoke up from the back and said, "Tim, I really enjoy my life.   I feel like a king".    We all became amazed by his natural determination to be cheerful in all circumstances.   Although he plainly must have been in pain from time to time, he never complained.     He would have a little rest, then start afresh.      He was like an adult sized child with great manners having been brought up so carefully.      He was a ray of sunshine.   If my mother had ever called out for him, he would jump up and thunder down the stairs to see what she needed.

He most certainly had a faith in God.      It was a simple one, just as it ought to be.     Intellect can be problematic.    God wants us to come to him as children, which is exactly how his relationship with God was.

We will fondly remember Andrew for his determination to stay positive in difficult situations, for his light hearted spirit and his cheerful, happy disposition.

The greatest and hardest impact fell upon my mother. She had been there for Andrew from 10 days old to just past his 38th birthday.      He had only ever lived with my parents.   They were coping with life together in their new home in Witham.    My mother recognised for herself how much the move had improved his life.      She fully expected to see out her days at that flat before Andrew's death.

Following Andrew's death, my mother was almost inconsolable.     It was clear that she felt there was now no reason for her life.      She wanted to die and told me so every day for the next 6 years of her life.      Although her physical health was hazardous, she had managed to keep on top of it by complying with her numerous medications.    However, after Andrew's death, both her physical and mental health deteriorated dramatically. Before the year was out she was hospitalised for several weeks. She could no longer return to her home and needed to move into a local care home.

I was able to visit her each day.    Her state of mind slowly improved, albeit that she would constantly tell me she wanted to die.    By the end of 2015, both Mary and I could see the possibility of looking after her within our own home.     She lived with us up to her death in October 2020.    She had developed vascular dementia, which caused her to loose all her personality and many memories, but she always remember Andrew's appalling untimely death.

Even though, at times, she seemed not to recognise me, she never lost sight of her memories of Andrew.

The impact upon Mary and I was in needing to cope with my mother's desperately poor reactions to Andrew's death and to help meet her daily needs.    Andrew had done so much for her and I only needed to provide assistance for those matters which were too burdensome for him. Life became, understandably, fraught with anxiety for her well being and frustrations at how serious an impact Andrew's death had had on her.

My mother's financial benefits were sufficient to cover all her needs, so we were at least spared the pressure of the additional living expense.

Due to the absence of Andrew all her needs were fulfilled by Mary and I.   This naturally accounted for a high number of hours of devotion, under growing difficult conditions due to worsening ill health in body and mind.   Although some care was provided by a care assistant, all medications were administered by myself, including the delivery of her daily insulin needs by way of an injection.

There was also a direct impact on Mary and me.

As we spoke to one investigation into Andrew's death after another, we never found it any easier to talk about what had happened to him and the awful situation he was in during his last days at the Linden Centre.    It preyed on us that he had been alone, unable to receive visitors for the first two days, and was apparently treated as a problem rather than the delightful person he was to us.   It galled us that successive health service employees had completely ignored us when we said that he must not be allowed to run out of his prescribed medication.

When he was admitted to the Linden Centre we felt that at last he would get specialised care and be reintroduced to this prescribed medication.      Nothing could be further from the truth.    Our good friend visited and had to beg staff to give him a drink of milk.   He was in a very poor state and extremely frightened.

Andrew was a very vulnerable man with learning difficulties.    Nobody seemed to understand what care he should have.

Andrew died as a direct result of not having his prescribed medication and having an unmanaged withdrawal.     It was not a good death.   It is still something that causes us pain to think about, more than ten years after his death.

We have included a picture of him at his 38th birthday party, a happy memory.    The other picture provided was taken the year before his death in 2013, which shows, Andrew, my mother and myself.

We are very pleased that the inquiry into the disproportionate number of deaths at the Linden Centre is taking place.    We would like to thank Baroness Lampard and the whole team for bringing light to this very dark situation.

Our daughter, Keziah, who was in her early twenties when Andrew died has also provided an impact statement.

**Keziah Pooley**: When I was a kid I didn't realise that my uncle Andy had learning disabilities and schizophrenia; he was just my shy, sweet uncle.     After my grandad died it was like Andy decided to take on all his caring responsibilities without being asked.    I was so proud of him.     When they moved to Essex I was so happy to be able to spend more time with Andy and my grandma, and I loved taking them to new places.     Andy was so excited.   Every time he left the house he treated it as if it was the most special adventure, even if he was just going to the shops.    He was so joyful about every new day.

When his medication ran out, we trusted completely that it would get started again without any problems. It seemed like such a simple thing to sort out.       As Andy got more and more sick and more and more scared, we still thought that as long as we could get a doctor to listen, he would be ok.

It wasn't until he'd already been in hospital for a week that I started to realise that no one was paying attention at all.     Andy was catatonic, unable to speak or react at all.    I was telling a nurse about what he was like as a person and she told me "we thought he was always like this".    I was devastated to think that they had assumed my funny, sweet uncle was always silent and non-responsive, just because of his learning disabilities.

On the day before he died I went to visit him with my grandma.     He was obviously scared and distressed. I don't think he was conscious but he looked like he was having bad dreams.    My grandma was upset that she wasn't able to get through to him and I reassured her that he was in the right place and he would be fine.    The next day we received a call to say he had died.     I felt so guilty that I had told my grandma he would be ok.     Even though I knew we had done everything we could, it was difficult not to feel guilty.    My grandma never recovered from Andy's death.     Andy was her light and it was like she had nothing else to live for.     My parents looked after her so well for the rest of her life but when I visited you'd hear her praying under her breath "please God let me die".     I feel so sad that my final memories of my uncle and my grandma have been overtaken by Andy's death.    The memories of everything that happened are so much heavier and more vivid than the happy memories from the rest of my life.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of the account, you will have heard Andrew refer to the photo of the 38th birthday party.     That was the photo that was shown at the start but I'm going to ask Amanda if she can play that photo again.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: There's one more photo to show.    Would you show that now too, please?

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that's the end of this account.

**The Chair**: Well, I am grateful to Tim and Mary Pooley, Mr and Mrs Pooley, and their daughter Keziah for that account.

**Mr Griffin**: We are now going to hear about Bruce Moorcroft. Rachel Troup will read a commemorative account provided by Bruce's brother, Ash Moorcroft.

Before she does that, Amanda, please show the photograph.

*(Photograph was displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.    Rachel, would you please read the account.

Statement of Ash Moorcroft read by Ms Troup
-------------------------------------------

**Ms Troup**: Commemorative account, live of Bruce Moorcroft, 2 August 1986 to 29 April 2012.

"Bruce was born on 2 August 1986 in Colchester and was the middle child of Michelle.    Bruce had an older sister, Jennifer, and younger brother, Ash.    Bruce's early life was spent in Colchester attending St Andrew's Primary School, before attending Sir Charles Lucas Arts College in Colchester, and progressing to Colchester Institute to complete a chef's course.    Cookery and catering was Bruce's passion.   He held many jobs in the catering industry before becoming too unwell to continue.

"Bruce was generally mischievous, amiable and loyal to his friends and family.    Bruce enjoyed his paper round, had a good friendship circle and always had work of some sort as soon as he was able, including Saturday jobs in his teens, in cafés, et cetera.   From the age of 13 he had a morning and evening paper round, which he enjoyed as he earned money.   Bruce would regularly attend Rileys, his favourite snooker/pool bar and would spend what he had earned.    Bruce also enjoyed and was good at darts.

"Bruce had three children, the eldest was six years old when he died and the youngest had recently been born.

"Bruce's difficulties with mental health began in his teenage years.   Bruce would often experience voices and depression.   This affected his relationships and work.   Bruce experienced voices, which he described as commanding him to take actions, including self-harm, and engaging in very dangerous behaviours.

"He unfortunately found himself detained under Section 136 on numerous occasions, but he was never admitted for any period of time to enable a full assessment of his needs.     Towards the end of his life, he was imprisoned, having set fire to himself and his home.

"Bruce began to self-medicate, which worsened the situation further, but seemed to give health professionals another reason to deny treatment: it's all drugs.   But this was a symptom, not a cause.   We were told countless times he could not be helped due to drugs but this was occasional use.    In fact, his post mortem showed no illicit substances in his system.

"It seemed that we got answers and questions from his inquest.    The family attempted on numerous occasions to get him admitted to psychiatric care but were denied repeatedly, including taking him to A&E, calling the police and taking him directly to the mental health unit at The Lakes.    Unfortunately, the only time as a family we were offered support was the day after he died.    'Let us know if there is anything we can do', they said.

"Unfortunately, in writing this commemorative account the memories of childhood, adolescence and early adult life have been overshadowed by the repeated trauma of being denied help and knowing what would happen, given the trajectory that was unfolding before all of our eyes.   Bruce was only 25 when he died.   The police were helpful and tried, but were also denied by North Essex Partnership.

"The indicators in his life that death would follow were ignored: his self-medication, homelessness, family tensions, unemployment, deliberate self-harm and risk-taking behaviours.      It seemed the only time we were offered support was after it was too late and too many young people in similar situations have followed afterwards.

"From kind, caring and affectionate Bruce the Moose, to a life over far too early, with those who were supposed to support but didn't.     It is difficult to recall positives or fond memories because everything has been overshadowed by failure, should haves, and could haves.

"Kind regards, Ash Moorcroft."

**Mr Griffin**: May we see the further photographs, please.

*(Photographs were displayed)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is the end of this account.

**The Chair**: I'm very grateful to Mr Moorcroft for his account of his brother.      Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last of the accounts that you will hear in public.    You will hear two further accounts today but they will be in private and the hearing in public will resume tomorrow morning.

We will resume tomorrow morning at 10.30, rather than the usual 10.00, and that's because, Chair, you have one private account that you're going to view first of all.

So we will see people again tomorrow at 10.30.   We will now break and I'm going to ask, Chair, that the live feed is ended.

*(12.30 pm)*

*(The hearing adjourned until 10.30 am the following day)*

