.. raw:: html

   <a id="hearing-link" href="https://lampardinquiry.org.uk/hearings/hearing-day-05-commemorative-and-impact-accounts/">Official hearing page</a>

Hearing Day 05
==============

.. raw:: html

   <details id="hearing-meta" open>
        <summary>
            <span class="open">Hide video</span>
            <span class="closed">Show video</span>
        </summary>
   <lite-youtube videoid="sfCmyIxIsGo" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   <lite-youtube videoid="mM92XOYzCYo" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   </details>

*(10.00 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, today we continue to hear commemorative and impact evidence.       Again we will be hearing about some difficult and distressing matters and I refer again to the emotional support service that is available, overseen by the Inquiry's chief psychologist. Counsellors are present here, and they can put their hands up for all to see, just sitting at the back there with black lanyards, and further services are available through the Inquiry's website, which is lampardinquiry.org.uk, or by asking a member of the Inquiry team.     We're wearing purple lanyards.    As I've said before, we want all of those engaging with the Inquiry to feel safe and supported.

We'll hear first this morning from Sofia Dimoglou, and I invite her to sit at the table.      Sofia is giving a commemorative account about her mother, Valery Dimoglou, and may I ask that the photograph be put up on the screen?

**Ms Dimoglou**: Shall I just start?

**Mr Griffin**: Yes, please.

Statement by Sofia Dimoglou
---------------------------

**Ms Dimoglou**: Hello, everybody.    I just want to thank everybody for this massive moment.     As I was driving here, I realised how huge it is that it's actually happening.   I thank the chair for being here and the amazing legal team, but all the brave people who got us here.   There are a lot of people who are really brave, especially Melanie and Lisa, who were incredible.

So I want to talk about my mum, who was Val -- we called her "Val" -- and she was a phenomenal person, full of vivacity and fun, and to write about her properly would take a whole book.   A film would be what would really be good for her.   But this is a snapshot of who she was and who we and the world lost -- I'll get stronger in a minute -- when she took her own life in October 2015.

So her life was hard when she was young but she was really resilient and she knew how to deal with adversity from a young age.   So she was born at the very start of World War Two on August 15, 1939 and her dad, William Greenwood, had survived World War One and the Somme but had shellshock and ongoing PTSD.   He was a knocker-upper for the railways, making sure people got to work on time, and Val was always very punctual.    He liked gardening, which Val inherited from him, though they were never really close.   Her mum, Helen, worked hard to bring up the three girls -- Val was the youngest -- as well as doing housekeeping for others for a little extra money.   Val absolutely adored her, as we all did.

Our grandma and the three girls were evacuated from rural Kilham to Hull for the first few years of Val's life and this embedded in her a love for the countryside and separated her from her dad.   She passed this deep connection to nature to all of her children and our best times were out walking with Val and our dogs.   She later witnessed serious incidents of violence and this had a long-term effect on her.   She also stopped her mother from committing suicide and she knew the importance of staying alive, believing that things could get better.

Val was cheeky and very bright as a child and she passed the test to go to grammar school but she wasn't allowed to go because of the cost of the uniform.   She always wore hand-me-downs and the family was really poor but very proud and very independent.   There was also a belief from her Victorian dad that she should not rise out of her class through education, something that had a profound effect on her life as she had a deep desire to improve her mind by reading, learning new words and learning about the world.

She did this all her life, but the course of her future would have been so different, so much more nourishing, stimulating and financially rewarding had she been allowed to take up the education she was offered.   She knew this and always said she was glad to have had her four children, but we knew that her life-long struggles with money and the drudge of working in hospitality then as well as raising four children and a dog single-handedly had a big impact on her mental and physical health.   It also made her fight hard for us to go to the best local schools, even when she had to battle the authorities to achieve this.

Val's mind was always abuzz with the possibility of adventure and she left home at 15 to be independent and to begin exploring the world.   She got a job as a nanny from an advert in The Lady magazine and went to Stratford-upon-Avon, where she was treated like a housemaid or servant, so she ran away one night.   She had already secured a waitressing job at Falmouth Hotel and loved it there in Cornwall.   My dad fell instantly in love with her when he saw her dancing at a rock and roll venue in Falmouth when his merchant ship docked there.   A couple of years before Val first attempted to take her own life, my sister arranged a holiday with our divorced parents and we took them back to that place where they met, and that was really sweet.

Falling in love and pregnancy meant that Val could not continue her adventures.    She had planned to go to France next, and as Dad had to go back to sea -- he was a Greek merchant seaman with a British company -- Val went to Hull so her mum and sisters could help her with my brother.   She lived there in dire poverty in a vermin-infested flat, but did a great job and would work as a waitress to earn enough to live when Grandma looked after us.   Dad sent some money to her and some to his mother in Greece.

My brother and I have such happy memories of growing up in Hull in spite of the hardship.       Dad gave up working at sea when I was about two, so my brother and I had built a strong connection with Val and her mum, which we kept forever.

So the Hull version of Val was a really vibrant, modern woman.   She loved fashion, pop songs and popular culture.   We had so much love and days out, to Hull Fair, Beverly Westwood, Hull's lovely parks and cafes. Val threw children's parties in our garden, made Christmas magical and the summers long and full of picnics and adventures.       She made us believe in fairies and magic by making magic happen right in front of our eyes.   When I asked her, when I was older, if she regretted having children so young, she was adamant that she was so glad she had us when she was young, with the energy to work hard to give us things and to make every day fun.

Things did change in about 1965, and that's when I was nearly five and we moved to Colchester in Essex because my dad, being Greek, hated the cold and the rain of Hull and the north of England.   I think this really isolated Val and made her depend on him, which wasn't good.   The pain of leaving her mam at this time was deep and we were distraught that Grandma was so far away, though we saw her every school holiday.

There had been signs of mental health issues already.   Val suffered bad post-natal depression after I was born -- Dad was back at sea -- and she always had really bad PMS.   Neither of these conditions were recognised or treated in those days in any way -- not sure that they are now actually fully, the PMS bit -- and they created really strong mood swings in Val, from elation to deep frustration, sometimes bordering on depression, but she always pulled herself out of it to do something nice with us and for us.

One of the ways that Val showed love was by buying us lovely special gifts.    She travelled once over 100 miles just to buy me a book that I wanted and she made every Whitsun, Easter, Bonfire Night and Christmas magical beyond words, with thoughtful gifts, new clothes, decorations, special food.   We know that she made so many sacrifices for us, rarely treating herself and always encouraging our hobbies, art, reading, nature, with gifts or trips, anything.

So one of the things she bought, she bought me the Cicely Mary Barker Flower Fairy books because when I was in Cornwall I was obsessed with wild flowers and they taught me so much.    And my brother always had the best Hornby train sets and Matchbox and Dinky cars.    She read to us every night and used to ask us questions about what we had read, not in a teacherly way, but helping us to embed knowledge and recall.    It was like a really big thing for her that we understood what we'd read.    We used to say our prayers with her until she suddenly stopped believing in God and I never knew really why she did that.   And as we grew up, we felt that she was really fiercely protective of us, really looking after the family so strongly.

Life in Colchester was brilliant -- sorry.      It's okay.   I have cried actually being a teacher before when I've been reading sad books, so it's okay.    Just pull yourself together.    Life in Colchester was brilliant in many ways, especially when our little brother and sister arrived seven and nine years after me, but it was not always easy and Dad and Val argued a lot.    She had taken a job in a nightclub as well as in a Wimpy burger bar as my dad was really strict with money and did not earn a lot.   He would tell her to stop buying any luxuries and once I remember he cut the plug off the record player to save electricity.      Obviously my mum loved music.

Her job at the Andromeda Night Club gave her a bit of a laugh and she enjoyed the buzz of it.      We used to go with her when we were young to King's Road and Biba to buy her nice things to wear.      She loved fashion and it was a fabulous part of our lives, hearing about how the place was run.   She became friends with the owner and worked really hard.       He was kind to us, but my dad started to resent her working there and told her to give it up.

She was really beautiful, my mum, when she was young and she got lots of compliments.       Neither my mum or dad drank and my mum was really strong morally and had a really strong sense of loyalty.      My dad was Greek and a bit jealous, I think, and her frustration and loneliness really grew at this point and I could see that she was getting really frustrated.      I and my older brother did encourage my mum to leave my dad for lots of reasons that I don't really need to go into, but the two -- the other two children kind of kept the family together and our house was tied to the job -- my dad did engineering -- so he was an engineer and the job he had came with a tied house, so we did feel sort of like we had to stay there.    But eventually she did divorce my dad and the mood did lighten when that process happened -- sorry, I've lost my place a bit -- though it was hard on my younger brother and sister at the time, who were really close to him.    I'm really close to him now funnily enough.

I remember being so proud of her when she came back from court in her suit and said the judge had actually granted the divorce.   There were struggles about housing, there was a big danger that we were going to be evicted, and it became a motif of Val's life -- this is one of the things that went on and on through her life, where she was going to live, where she felt safe -- right to the end.

So she fought really hard for us to stay in that house, and we did stay in it and it was tragic.     One of the big tragedies was that she felt that she was being evicted from the hospital at the end of her life after she'd protected us all in our housing for so long.

When I was asked to write this, it kind of came suddenly and my brother, my older brother, agreed that he would write something for it, so I'd really like to share that now, and the next bit is his words that he wrote.    He actually wrote it on Val's birthday this year, 2024, and he said it was such a beautiful thing to do on her birthday.   So this is my brother:

"Our mum was brave, hard-working, loving, intelligent, kind and gave herself to raise us kids and provide the best of everything to give us the best start in life.

"She was our mum, our friend, our big sister, having given birth to me when she was a girl herself.   That's why we grew up calling her 'Val' rather than 'mum'.      She played with us and was a part of so many of our games. She did all she could to give us the best education, from reading to us at bedtime to choosing a brilliant primary school which taught French when most others didn't.    She pressed the local grammar school to take me and then my sister as our secondary modern had few A-level students, and this was an amazing thing to do for us, and a real battle.

"People loved her, especially when she ran the restaurant at Williams and Griffin [in] Colchester.      She was a lively Yorkshire lass and could be blunt -- she was never afraid to disagree -- but everyone admired that she was so down to earth.

"I don't know how she managed to work so hard.      For many years she had two jobs combined with looking after four children and a dog single-handedly; she carried bags of shopping home from town before we had a car, and cooked the most delicious meals.   When dad was around he obstructed her modern view on what women could do -- even though she paid for his driving lessons from her work and bought the first family car.   She paid for all four children to learn to drive when we were 17 and told us how important independence would be in life, and that driving was part of that.

"Her determination wasn't to be thwarted, no matter what.   In fact we quoted her on the funeral order of service, 'Don't tell me what to do!'.   We loved this spirit in Val.

"Every penny she earned was for us, and she nourished us with the best food and provided us with the best holidays -- we have never met anyone from our era who has seen so much of the British Isles -- we had the loveliest times: even when our old Triumph Herald broke down, Val would turn [even that] into an adventure and a learning experience, teaching us resilience and optimism.

"If it was pelting with rain, she would ask if we wanted to go out in the car and find some puddles to splash in [or to drive the car through].   She would get the giggles at stuff as easily as we would.   She would love singing and dancing to the Top 30 with us on the radio.     She loved singing, till someone told her that she couldn't sing.    She was really sensitive to criticism, and it was sad when the music stopped for her.    Sundays were family walks, black and white films and her amazing Sunday roast.    She was super-organised to fit so much into a day -- she wouldn't let us wash the dishes, even."

This is my brother speaking, not me, for the next bit.

"She helped me financially all through her life, even though I could be so lazy, and I feel guilty about that now."

This is still my brother, my older brother.

"Val was an avid reader and a life-long learner -- from newspapers, books, anything.    She was immersed in Dostoyevsky's 'Crime and Punishment' one summer in Cornwall [possibly even that one] and would have made a brilliant criminologist or lawyer, had she had the opportunity, but further education was not an [opportunity] when she was working all hours and raising us all.     She never blamed anyone (maybe her dad [a little]) for her lack of formal education but she always knew she had not reached her full potential. I think this was a factor in her depression, though we never had that conversation sadly.

"Val was close to people and would help anyone, especially if they were in trouble.   She didn't have friends to the house but encouraged us to have friends round and would feed them and have a laugh with them. So many people still talk about her sense of fun and her generosity.   One time though, in my 20s [this is my brother], I had some disagreeable biker friends round and Val chucked them out as they refused to take off their studded biker jackets and she thought they might damage the leather sofa that she had worked so hard to buy; she was only little but tough as nails and I will always remember her manhandling a couple of them out of the house!   The others left with their tails between their legs!

"We had such special times with Val, from Cornwall to the Lake District to Scotland.    She was an amazing driver and took us to so many fancy and historic places, though she had to scrimp and save: dinner at the Post Office Tower; the Headland Hotel in Newquay; the Imperial at Blackpool; the Beatles' houses in Liverpool when the youngest sister was obsessed with them; afternoon tea at Harrods and the Ritz.

"Val was super-fit, striding up Beachy Head cliffs and leaving us behind, though she was in her 50s then. Her love of animals and nature was deep and beautiful and our first dog, Monty, the Golden Labrador was so special, trained and walked by Val, mainly, and adored by us all.   Bellina [she's on the photo], an Italian dog adopted by my sister and then Val, gorgeous Plum and Tommy were all dogs Val had such a bond with, and who would do anything for her.    She felt happier with dogs, as they were so steady and loyal.

"My last happy memory close to when she ended her life was sat on the promenade in Clacton.   We sat at a cafe all afternoon and left as the sun faded.     We laughed a lot all her life, and that was a hilarious day.   It was good to see her being her old self. A jogger passed and she exclaimed: "Get those knees up!" and she interacted with anyone who cared to chat, just like the old days.

"I miss her love and her special personality -- she was always funny and [always] ready to laugh, like her mam, our Grandma.    Not many mums played April Fool's jokes on their kids -- she once sewed up the cuffs of my school shirt!   We had a big laugh every day about something or other!

"I am so sad she did not receive the care she needed -- I am sure she would have had a long and mostly happy older life."

So that was all from my older brother, and my younger sister and younger brother would also have similar things to say.   Lots of brilliant stories about Val and how unconventional she was and how thoughtful and her generosity and love.

Her five grandchildren adored her and loved her stories, her sense of fun and her incredible generosity and her interest in them as people.    I think we always knew that Val suffered from mental health issues, but she managed these well and without drugs most of her life.   She almost never drank alcohol, a little bit at Christmas -- a Snowball, that's what she liked -- never smoked and was really anti-drug.     She sought counselling when her mum died, when she suffered the loss of her mum, and our first dog, that really hit her hard, and also when she felt she made an error moving to a flat in Holland-on-Sea, when where she lived seemed to consume who she was as a person, though her houses were always beautifully decorated and with an amazing garden.

Getting older was hard for her, and although cognitive behavioural therapy did work to some extent, she eventually agreed to take anti-depressants when her psychiatrist went down that route.    She had never been diagnosed properly, but we thought she may be bipolar or something similar as she had big mood swings.    These could be scary, but we always loved her and we worried when she was low.

There's a little bit that's been redacted.    I'm just trying to put the best bit together.

So there was a spell that she had that was quite uncharacteristic anxiety, it lasted longer than usual, and there was an unsuccessful session with a psychologist where Val was really -- she didn't like talking really to lots of people in the room, which of course was part of what happened next, and she felt she couldn't talk openly.    There was a trainee observer in the room and she was too nervous to say she didn't want them there.   And quite soon after that she crashed her car into a moving lorry and was seriously injured when the car caught fire.    No one else was injured, though a passer-by did stop and pulled her from the wreckage of the car.   Her beloved dog, Plum, was killed in this crash and Tommy, the other dog, escaped and she now lives with my sister and comes to stay with me on holiday.   This was December 7, 2013.   The aftermath of the actual crash was filmed -- it just happened to be a media outlet behind her -- and is still available on the internet -- it's still there -- and it's a disturbing but real piece of footage.

So this was sort of the beginning of the end, and it involved years of medical attention because Val had really severe burns.       She had a broken hip, she couldn't walk properly after this, not fully, and she had such deep anguish.     Sorry.

**The Chair**: Take your time.

**Ms Dimoglou**: So Val at this point was beyond devastated and really guilty about the death of her beautiful Plum, her dog.    She could not see living in the house where she lived with her dogs, and Plum was buried in the garden. And she talked about suicide a lot at this point and we begged her psychiatrist to help her to stay alive.

She had some brilliant treatment and some awful treatment.    There were brief flashes of the old fun Val, mainly like when she was playing scrabble with the people, the inpatients, but very few.      We spent hours looking at properties because she couldn't go back to her house, but she knew she needed a place of asylum, of being looked after and cared for so she did not kill herself.     None of her children were in a position to offer this.     We all had young children ourselves at this point as well -- sort of young-ish.

She had a real sense of justice to the very end and it was Val who stopped the unit she was in from writing up in public in their office what the residents had done to try to take their own lives.      She befriended many people there and made them feel loved again.

The impact of Val's death continues to this day -- as you can see with all of us -- with all of us it's the same.     Hearing about suicide is a trigger, but we have learned to accept that that is part of life, though it could be minimised with better mental healthcare.    The loss of Val from our lives is enormous, inexpressible really.    To go there is to admit the loss of so much love and fun and potential memories with grandchildren and with us all.

My daughter has been severely affected by the trauma and often speaks about how Val would be so proud of her achievements and how she would have been there for her. I know my siblings keep their sadness to themselves often or shut it out to survive.    We are all trying to live our lives for Val and for Dad, who is still alive and who often speaks of Val's amazing personality, when he met and fell in love with her.

The loss feels worse because we feel that, with the right treatment, more fitting drugs, if they were necessary, more talking therapy and a safe space to live, Val would not have crashed her car and would have lived a much longer and happier life.    It was agony seeing her desperate for help but denied that.    It took me five years to feel I could even breathe again. I almost lost my job as an English teacher because I was being made at that time to teach -- I was being made, as my job, to teach books about suicide and death -- there's a lot of books about suicide and death that young people read -- and an unsympathetic management at that point.   I got a skin condition from stress and depression and lost weight and all interest in anything, to be honest, though I did what I could to support my daughter through her own grief.   I also tried to be there for my lovely sister, who found my mum dead after the hospital let her out for 12 hours -- and we didn't know this -- who also became unwell.

To be honest, the shambolic and disingenuous investigations -- a number of them -- after my mum's death by the health authorities were probably one of the most traumatic parts of the whole story that we've had to live.   Nonetheless we have the best memories of Val and this statutory Inquiry is something she would have believed in as she was passionate about the need to improve mental health services, to offer suffering people a safe place to live and to really talk to them and to try understanding what is wrong.

We hope that all the effort put into the Inquiry does not end in a hollow "Lessons learned" statement and that real policy changes can be implemented.   We hope that people will tell the truth and that the Inquiry can compel people to be honest and to be part of a permanent and positive shift in mental healthcare in the UK to something kind and caring, offering true asylum without limit and safeguarding individuals and society from a health issue which should have solutions, as any other physical ailment.

Thank you very much.

**Mr Griffin**: Would you put up the remaining photographs, please?

*(Images shown)*

**Ms Dimoglou**: That's her laughing.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

**The Chair**: Mrs Dimoglou, thank you so much.    It's wonderful to hear about your inspiring mother.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, there will be just a very brief pause while we change the table around.     (Pause)

We will next be hearing from Paul Guille and I invite him to go to the table.      He will be accompanied, I understand, by his brother, Alex. And Paul will be reading a commemorative account about his sister, Bethany Lilley, Beth.     There's a photo that's gone up on the screen, just so that you're aware.

Statement by Paul Guille
------------------------

**Mr Guille**: I would start by just echoing what Sofia said in terms of thanks for the amazing staff of the Inquiry, first of all for doing the work you're doing and second of all for supporting us so well throughout.   All of our family have felt incredibly supported by the way you've approached it, so thank you for that.

I would also just quickly say, before I start, that this was written mostly by my sister, Sarah, who did a huge amount of just asking the right questions, asking the right people and, as a result, sort of got the inquest going initially and things like that, and got us involved in this process as well.   She kind of decided it was time for her to step away, so I just want to kind of start by paying tribute to her and all the work she did to try and get some answers on behalf of Bethany.

So this account is mostly written from Sarah's perspective but, as I'm one of six, lots of us all had different memories and different pieces we wanted to add in, so I'll kind of make that clear as we go through. So she said:

"Thank you for the opportunity to provide a commemorative account for the Lampard Inquiry regarding my sister, Bethany Lilley ... who died in January 2019, aged 28, whilst an inpatient on Essex Partnership University ... Trust's Thorpe Ward [in] Basildon.

"In order to write this account, I have referred to and included information that was submitted to the Essex Coroner following my sister's death, with the input of my siblings and mum, together with our recollections of our experience.   We are very happy to provide any additional information or evidence or greater detail of our experience at any point.

"Beth was born on 12 September 1990.     The youngest of a set of twins, and the youngest of six siblings from Dr John Guille and Mrs Julia Guille.   Beth was born in the breech position and had one arm over her head.    As a consequence she got 'stuck' until the consultant manually moved her arm, causing it to break, to allow her to be born.   It is not clear whether there was any impact of this period of oxygen starvation on Beth. Although it did not affect her physical development, the family have always felt it may have impacted her emotional development.

"Beth lived in the family home, with the exception of a short period when she lived on her own, until she married her childhood sweetheart in 2015.   They lived in one bedroom in the family home, sharing kitchen and bathroom facilities, until they could rent their own place in Colchester which they did for approximately one year until they separated during an intense period of Beth's mental illness.

"As a child, Beth was impulsive.   Due to her behaviour, she was [unfortunately] asked to leave the secondary school she attended with her brothers, and was moved to an alternative school in Clacton, from which she was frequently truant.   Her Dad then paid for Beth to attend a private school in Colchester.   Aged 16, Beth was diagnosed with and treated for ADHD.    She dropped down an academic year and left the private school with five GCSEs.

"There were few things Beth enjoyed more than spending time with her cat [appropriately] named Smirnoff, usually in front of an episode of EastEnders or some kind of comedy series (anything from Miranda to the Gilmore Girls was always good with her!).      She was also an enormous fan of music, especially the rapper Eminem, even getting to see him perform live on one occasion."

And we even had some of his lyrics quoted at her funeral as well, appropriate ones I should add.

"Beth experienced several severely traumatic events during her teenage years and into her early 20s, the details of which another family member has asked [us] not to include.   We now understand that these events impacted Beth's mental health severely and began the start of her involvement with the services provided by Essex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust.

"[During] these experiences, Beth worked first as a care assistant as a care home.    She really enjoyed her job and loved looking after people.   She spent a short time as a domiciliary care assistant and then managed to secure a job at her dad's GP surgery as a Health Care Assistant and phlebotomist from 2012.   She was widely regarded as brilliant at her job, loved by all of her patients and the staff.    Due to her struggles with her mental health, she [did have] to leave the role.      At one point she spoke to the surgery about returning to her job, which she [really] really wanted to do.    She returned for a period of a week on admin duties, but her mental health was such that she [just] wasn’t able to continue.

"In 2014 she studied for a short time at Anglia Ruskin University to become a qualified nurse, with the intention to specialise in Mental Health, but unfortunately did not pass the academic assignments. Beth was diagnosed with dyslexia around this time. [She] continued to want to train as a nurse and applied for information about a nursing qualification with the Open University in 2018.

"During 2014/15 Beth's mental health declined quite suddenly.   She spent blocks of time as an inpatient on the mental health wards, at one stage she was resident for over eight months."

I've lost myself for a second.

"After this admission, she had great difficulty readjusting to the world outside the ward and ended up yo-yoing backwards and forwards in and out of the inpatient wards.

"Beth's dad was a local GP and worked extraordinarily long hours.   When Julia was unwell, Beth's Granny on her Dad's side would often visit from Guernsey to stay and support the family.

"And Beth's parents divorced in 2003, when [Bethany] was 12, and Julia was moved out of the ... home into a flat a few miles away.

"Beth's dad died in October 2018, after which her destructive behaviour reached new heights as her struggles to cope with [the] death went unrecognised by the teams supposed to be supporting her.   Beth eventually succeeded in taking her own life whilst an inpatient in January 2019, when she ligatured.

"Beth did not have children, although she wanted nothing more than to be a mum.   She was incredibly close to all of her nieces and nephews as well as the children of her close friends, who all knew her as 'Aunty Beth'. Beth was fiercely loyal to her friends and would be there no matter what time of day or night to provide emotional or practical support.   Beth's six nieces and nephews were aged between 10 and 2 when she died.    She absolutely adored them and requested photographs of them while she was an inpatient, as she recognised that thinking about them helped her through her days.    Beth saw them almost daily when [she was] at home, and never missed a family gathering.

"My personal recollections of Beth [this is from Sarah's perspective] are limited as I went away to university during Beth's teenage years, and then moved away from the area for a period of ten years. I remember hearing about her struggles from my Dad and even considered whether I could support her if she moved in with me, giving her a change of scene and people. I still wonder whether this could have made a difference.

"Beth supported me during a particularly difficult period of my life, when other people told me to 'just get on with it'.   She could see how much I was hurting and tried to help.   I will never forget that kindness when I needed it [the] most.

"She was such a kind and loving aunty to my daughter, who regularly told me that Aunty Beth was the only one who understood her.   My daughter was 10 when Beth died.   She was devastated and asked how it happened.    I asked if she knew that Aunty Beth used to hurt herself.   My daughter replied that, yes, she knew that.   I sadly explained that Aunty Beth had hurt herself too much this time.   My daughter looked at me and said simply 'I thought so'.   She wrote this poem after [Bethany] died: 'Amazing 'Unique 'Nice 'Terrific 'Intelligent 'Exciting 'Beautiful 'Excellent 'Totally brilliant 'Helpful 'I love you.' "Beth's inquest took three years to reach the Coroner's court.   It was three weeks long and held under Article 2 of the Human Rights Act with a jury.     During those three years, we attended every single meeting and I worked extremely closely with our solicitor and barrister preparing for the case, spending many hours reading disclosure, making notes and asking questions, on top of my full-time job.    My own family did their best to support me while I poured my heart and soul into working out where things had gone so terribly wrong while they constantly worried about the impact on my mental and physical health as barely a day went past when I did not suffer from anxiety-induced migraine, for which I required prescription medication and drank alcohol to excess with worrying frequency.

We would say we are a close family, but there are many things we do not know about each other's lives, and we would say this is appropriate.   However, during the course of preparing for the inquest all the details of Beth's life were laid bare.    To begin with, this was in some ways positive, as it helped us to piece together just why she became so unwell.    But details such as her post-mortem report detailing the weight of each of her organs was too much to bear.

"I read every single page of her 10,000-page medical records, including the sentence that a member of staff thought necessary to record in perpetuity that, 'Beth gets on well with all of her siblings, apart from Sarah'.   I cannot unread those words and can never fix that relationship that I did not even realise Beth felt was so broken.

"We were six siblings, now we are five.      And no mother should have to bury her child.   Losing Beth continues to affect us all in different ways, particularly for Julia, who lived with Beth during her most difficult times and constantly towards the end of her life, and Matt, Beth's twin, feels her loss most acutely.   We have individually suffered in different ways.    Panic attacks, depression, relationship struggles, and physical health problems that can be directly attributed to our grief.   Several of us have sought counselling and some are continuing with it, five years later.

"Every time I think of Beth, see a photo of her, or visit her grave, I feel an overwhelming wave of sadness because I just always believed she would 'make it' and I still can't believe that she didn't."

The next words are from Julia Guille, who is Bethany's and our mum.   She asked to include these words:

"Beth's death has meant that when in conversation the subject of families come up, I feel very uncomfortable when talking about my children.      I can never decide whether to say I have six or five children. I feel as if I'm lying when I say six, but feel disloyal to Beth when I say five.     I'm never sure if or even how I can explain that Beth has died and the reason that she has died.

"I am constantly reliving the evening I was told that [Bethany] had died.     I received a phone call from her doctor describing all the events surrounding her death, how she was found with a ligature, attempts to resuscitate, but not actually telling me she was gone. It took a direct question from me before I was told the truth, that [Bethany] had died.    Even after all this time, it doesn't seem real."

And these words are from Matthew, who was Bethany's twin brother:

"Looking back, I am so privileged to be Beth's twin. She proudly took immense pleasure in sharing she was a twin with everyone she met and would often refer to me as her 'Twinny', which I wasn't too fond of at the time but now, I really miss it.

"Growing up with Beth as my twin is all I've known but I would describe our relationship as unique.    She had such a vibrant personality, and she was just so funny.   We would squabble as all siblings do but we were always together.   We went to a small village primary school and were in the same class, so we literally spent all our time together.   We shared a bedroom growing up as we were the same age, attended most things together (Sunday school, swimming lessons etc).    We really were a pair, right down to matching outfits our mum would dress us in as babies.

"When we went to secondary school, we didn't have any lessons together and we hung around with different friendship groups.   This is around the time when we started to unfortunately grow apart.    However, the close bond remained.   After secondary school we began to grow closer again before I moved away to Yorkshire to attend university and raise my children with my fiancé.     We still did communicate and visit each other from time to time but not enough.

"I have two young children who were 6 and 4 at the time of Beth's passing.     We try to talk openly about Beth and when my son asked what I was doing while writing this, he asked if he could add something too. I asked what he wanted to add and he said, 'she was really sweet and always lovely'.

"My son is the oldest of my two children and Beth's death has had a lasting impact on him.    He was 6 at the time of her passing and started to show a disconnect with the world around him.     The issues he faced impacted his education and his mental health.    Luckily for us my partner managed to arrange counselling for him; the school were very understanding and set time aside for these sessions as well as supplying additional support with his schoolwork.

"My daughter often expresses how much she misses her.    She is often distraught about how she does not have much memory of her, it is very upsetting to hear that she wishes she was still here.    She used to ask when Aunty Beth was going to come back.    It took a few years for her to finally understand, this was extremely hard for her, myself, and my partner.

"So, to summarise, years on we feel her loss greatly and regularly.    Be that through the children's emotions or our own memories, the death of my twin has impacted myself and my family massively.    Since Beth's passing, I have received one set of counselling, and I have recently had an assessment while I await further counselling.    I struggle with her loss greatly and I am acutely aware these feelings will no doubt be a part of me forever."

The next part is from Jo Stevens, who is Bethany's sister, our sister:

"As a family we have come to the agreement of writing separate statements if we so desire, as to the impact of Bethany's loss on us as individuals.    We have been through this process for nearly 5 years as a family which has been tough on us all.    We are all individuals and have different memories, different feelings and sometimes different opinions on things, so we thought it only fair we got to have our say as different family members.

"I've never had the opportunity to really put down in words the effect it has had on just me before. I have attempted bereavement counselling but wouldn't open up and was told that I seemed to be doing ok so I didn't really need it.     I was told that the images I was seeing in my head of my sister's body in the chapel of rest weren't flashbacks, they were just memories.   So, I continue to live my life because we all know life goes on!   I think about her often but rarely visit her grave.   I don't know whether it is just down to having a busy life or otherwise.

"Beth was my little sister, I loved her dearly! I remember her for being a lively, fun-loving young girl.   We missed our flight to Guernsey one year and at the time we were devastated, however we soon laughed about it once our dad came to the rescue.    I fell over in the mud just before our flight coming home too, she really did laugh at me!     The person that she turned into wasn't Beth, and I do not want to remember her as this shadow of herself.

"She turned to me initially at the very beginning of her real mental health struggles.   However, she soon drifted away as her mental health deteriorated.    There will always be the questions in my mind, 'Could I have done more?   Should I have done more?'.

"Losing Beth really took its toll on my family too. I struggled for months following our dad's and then her death.   I wandered around in a trance, and it wasn't until my Husband finally confronted me about feeling sorry for myself, but not doing anything about it, that I actually started to take note and realise I needed to snap out of it.    My daughter doesn't remember my sister but knows who she is in photographs, my two sons do remember her but their memories fade as they were still so young when it happened.

"So, in conclusion, it really affected me and still does in many ways.   I'm not sure I can actually put everything in words.   It obviously had a massive effect on my personal life, but it also affects my work life too sometimes.    Having to stay professional with people at the lowest points of their life, knowing deep down they probably won't actually get the help they require from mental health services, it makes me sad!"

And this last bit is from me.

The impact on Bethany's death on me personally is difficult to quantify.   When you are told that your sister is going into hospital because of her deteriorating mental health, the immediate response should be one of relief and gratitude.    It should be assumed that this is the place where she will get the support and care that she needs.    In our situation Bethany's hospital admissions served as a signal that her situation was getting worse and that it would likely worsen during her stay, whichever ward she would end up staying on.

Bethany's death felt so inevitable.    When I would visit her on the ward, when I was still living in the UK, and when I would video-call her from my apartment in Raleigh, she would talk about taking her own life flippantly.    "I tried to kill myself today, but the nurses stopped me.   So that's good" was something I heard more times than anyone ever should from someone they love.    This carefree attitude and the obvious signs that Bethany was not okay has often led me to question whether I did enough to help her.   Did I ignore those signs and become almost desensitised to her pain?      Could I have raised those concerns earlier?    Should I have just taken them more seriously and, if I had, might she still be alive today?

These painful and lingering questions are still difficult to manage, but immediately after her death they were absolutely deafening.    I took to drinking alcohol nightly.   Without doing so I was fearful of not sleeping at all or being woken up by nightmares.   It took until lent of 2020 until I was able to relearn how to manage my relationship with alcohol again.

I also took a huge financial impact after Bethany's death, paying hundreds of dollars in flights home, lost earnings and therapy sessions.    When my father died months before Bethany, I was offered the chance to see him in the hospital mortuary.    I turned this down and regretted it.   When Bethany passed, I could only get back to England days before her funeral and never had the chance to see her.   To not have had the chance of this closure is an especially painful outcome from the darkest period of my life and it's something that's never going to be fixed.

Up until I moved back to the UK, I actually had one last message from her on our WhatsApp chat.    I told her that I thought she was strong.    She replied to say "thank you" and that she hoped to believe it herself one day.   It seems unlikely that she felt strong in the days before she passed, but that's how I think of her.       To live how she did, to achieve what she did, to touch the lives that she did and to keep going in the face of everything in the way that she did took a kind of resilience that most people could not have even imagined having to show.   She's not just missed, she's remembered and she is an inspiration.

I'll just finish with the last bits, which was Sarah's words again:

"Beth had such a way of connecting people on their level -- meeting them where they were at and engaging with their interests and values even if they did not match her own.    Everyone who had the privilege of spending time with her has different memories of her and different ways of understanding what a truly special soul she was.

"Beth's immediate family numbers 15 people. However, the loss of her life extends far beyond her family to include her greatest friends, those who she would drop everything for when they needed help, and all of the patients that she looked after.   Even those she came into contact with over the course of her illness, both staff and patients, valued her friendship, her personality and her passion.   We were told over and over, whenever we met people from the Trust, 'we all loved Beth'.

"Thank you again for this opportunity to provide this Commemorative Account and for the [amazing] work that you are doing."

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.   If you just wait there, we'll play a few more photographs.

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last photograph, thank you.

**The Chair**: Thank you both very much indeed and will you also convey my thanks to the rest of your family.      Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we'll now hear the commemorative account of Jane Stanford and it will be read by her legal representative.

This is an account about Jane's mother, Dorothy -- or Dot -- Redditt and it is being read by Adefolaju Sanda.

**Mr Sanda**: Good morning, Chair.   Today I'll be reading the commemorative account of Jane Stanford, sat next to me, daughter of Dorothy Redditt, also known to her friends and loved ones as "Dot".

Statement by Jane Stanford (read)
---------------------------------

**Mr Sanda**: "Dot as she was known to all, my mum, was born in 1936, she was given a long life but cut short shockingly and tragically at age 85 in 2021, when she died alone, locked in her bathroom, the room in terrible disarray, surrounded by the paraphernalia of self-harm, the door smashed down by the police.      Many may think that someone else cleans up after this type of death, but they don't. The family are left with a horrific scene that can never be erased from their memories.     One must identify the body and this must be done by someone that knew them. We never got to see mum treated and well.    Her right to a normal old age free of mental torment [was] denied to her.    There was to be no normal decline which is expected in old age, no family at her bedside at her end, to say our goodbyes and hold her hand.

"Mum came from a family scarred by World War 1 PTSD. Her great grandfather sadly took his own life.    This was along with Mum's own issues of dealing with the upheaval of being evacuated during World War 2 at the tender age of 4, being separated from her brother and her parents.

"Mum married dad after a short courtship in 1956, having met at their place of work.     They had been married for 64 years when mum died.    Dad passed away recently, after a gradual decline in his physical and cognitive capacity, nearly 3 years after mum.     He was a mild mannered, gentle man not given to confrontation and was always supportive of mum through her long mental health difficulties.    Even if he did not always fully understand her difficulties, no matter how they impacted him he remained loyal and supportive, her 'rock', knowing and believing Mum's cyclical ups and downs in her mental health would somehow always ease with a little time and patience.

"When my sister and I were born in the 1960s, mum had the family she so wanted, but the pressures that come with motherhood were totally overwhelming for her and she did not cope with the demands, which affected her already fragile mental health.   Mum, looking back at that time, believed she had suffered with post-natal depression, but in the 1960s there appeared to be little awareness or help for this or any mental health difficulties.

"The cyclical nature of Mum's mental health difficulties thankfully did mean we saw times when mum shone past her difficulties.   Mum was a very creative and a talented artist, many friends and family still have her beautifully painted stones.    Mum's love of nature, flowers, animals and birds, meant these were her favourite subjects.   Mum could recognise bird song easily and identify birds in a flash.   She also loved her garden and when she was able, there would be a small veggie patch, fruit trees and bushes.   She would nurture her plant cuttings until they were healthy and thriving and these plants still live on in our gardens today.

"Mum was also a very good seamstress, she made clothes, toys and dolls, was always knitting when there was to be a new baby in the family or neighbourhood. There were also many very intricate embroideries framed on the walls of mum and dad's home.   Mum would make amazing fancy dress for me and my sister and often we would do well in competitions and win a prize.

"Mum learned to play the piano, the memories of Beethoven's Moonlight Sonata 1st Movement resounding through the house is very poignant for me.   Mum was involved with amateur dramatics, where she would enjoy singing and acting and I remember her performance in the panto Cinderella very well.

"Mum was also a very good baker of bread and cakes. The smell of a newly baked cake or bread was one I love and her old-fashioned deserts, a gooey jam roly poly always went down a treat.

"Like many older couples, as they moved towards retirement, mum and dad enjoyed caravaning and visited many places in Britain and France, in later years travelling further afield to Canada and the USA.    Dad recalled very fond memories of their wonderful trip to Bryce Canyon National Park Utah, sitting with mum after a meal, just admiring the stars, which with so little light pollution was magical.   Later as they aged travelling abroad became more difficult so mum and dad would often go to Southwold or Orford Ness for a short break, always with one of their rescue dogs in tow. They would hire a beach hut for the day and me and my sister and our four boys would come for a day by the beach.   Mum's four grandsons gave her great pleasure and she was always interested in their achievements and how they were making it in the world.

"Mum was confused and frustrated when it came to her mental health difficulties, full of contradictions in her search for answers.     She always seemed to be searching for answers to her difficult thoughts and feelings that so clearly caused her pain and sadness. She could articulate well what she felt were the causes, events which occurred deep in her past, but she found confronting these thoughts and feelings extremely difficult.   She sought solace in her faith at times in her life.    She sought answers from her GPs over many years, but became increasingly frustrated by the fact that medical treatment for her mental illness did not seem to work.   Mum felt no one understood her or seemed to be able to alleviate her depressed state.      She sadly took a lot of her frustrations out on family, friends and neighbours, seeking to blame those around her for not making her happy, understanding her or being able to relieve her clear pain.     This caused immense difficulties with her relationships.

"The final five years of Mum's life, dad recalled, were a period where Mum's frustrations gradually increased.   We all gradually noticed this trend.   The cyclical nature of Mum's mental health difficulties seemed to change to a more stable constant low mood with very challenging bouts of aggression.   She lost interest in her creative interests, music, her garden, the little holidays she so enjoyed.    She was clearly in distress and would wander off, having to be brought back by the police.    But once persuaded by the police to seek help in A&E, she would convince the staff that she was fine, even though it was clear to us that she was not.

"The months that led up to mum's death were the most terrifyingly anxious times of our lives as a family. The impact on our lives will never go away.    Both my sister and I have had to seek professional counselling and our dad suffered dreadfully and needed lots of support.   The wider family, namely our partners and grown-up children, should not be forgotten [as] they have been invaluable in supporting us and saw us suffer so much.

"Writing this and recalling the terrible memories of my utter feeling of helplessness, failing at every point to get anyone to listen to our concerns and get [help that mum] needed and deserved, brings on overwhelming physical symptoms of anxiety.   I cannot breathe, my heart is thumping, there is a knot in my stomach, my head is light, I panic, I am crying.    My thoughts are 'I must help mum', but no one is listening to my pleas, and no one wants to help us, mum will hurt herself and dad too [and] I need to prevent this catastrophic scenario [from happening].   I hear my dad crying, he is 93 and not in the best of health, he has been hit by mum, she has threatened to kill him, pushed him into the wall, locked him outside in the cold, the phone wires ripped out so he cannot call for help, he is afraid mum will burn the house down as she has threatened, she is verbally abusing him, he cannot leave her as she is threatening to harm herself and he wants to keep her safe, dad wants to take his own life because he cannot cope anymore, he just needs peace he says.    Mum is in severe mental health crisis but there is no one to help her get well, or see and accept the risk to dad physically and psychologically.

"We as a family also went through several distressing police incidents.

"In the weeks prior to mum's death, we as a family foolishly felt some relief once mum agreed to a voluntary admission to Ruby Ward.    Mum's experiences, according to her journal notes and our experiences of Ruby Ward over the weeks are to be recalled and will be dealt with later in the inquiry.   However, it is safe to say the majority of our interactions with Ruby Ward were not good ones.

"The failings left mum's mental health issues effectively untreated.   Discharge occurred without adequate support and into an environment that was not appropriate, within 5 days mum had attempted suicide again and six days [later] mum was dead.

"My sister and I spent hundreds of hours writing emails, letters, making phone calls, video call meetings.

"I am sure there is more I cannot recall.     Much of our efforts whilst mum was still on Ruby Ward trying to get our concerns listened to and acted on were ignored. None of our efforts prevented mum's tragic loss or provided explanation for what we believe were the events that contributed to mum's death.   All our efforts have been in vain.    This is the unending impact of what we have been through as a family.

"Mum, you lost your battle against a cruel and unkind illness, let down by those that should have cared for you and helped you get well, your struggles were immense and life long, but it was a full, valuable life. Your family all did the very best they could to support and care for you, especially dad, by your side for 64 years.     Even when it was impossible to reach you, locked in your pain and anguish, we were still fighting for you, to try and make things better for you and get you well.     It is so sad it was all in vain.

"We know you believed that you would someday go somewhere better with the angels and where there will be peace forever, I hope you are there now, because if anyone needed and deserved somewhere better and peace forever, it was you Mum."

**Mr Griffin**: Would you play the remaining photographs, please?

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

**The Chair**: Mrs Stanford, thank you very much indeed for that incredibly illuminating account.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that is time for our mid-morning break. May I suggest that we return at 11.40?

**The Chair**: 11.40, good.

*(11.07 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(11.43 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: We are hearing now from Karon Pimm, who will be speaking about her son, TJ.    And could we put up the photograph, please?

Statement by Karon Pimm
-----------------------

**Ms Pimm**: Yes, okay, so TJ was conceived with the help of a fertility drug.    After six weeks of pregnancy I was admitted to hospital for major surgery.    I had undiagnosed endometriosis and the drug that I took made it worse, so I had a tube, ovary and massive blood-filled cyst removed while I was six weeks pregnant.

The doctors were aware of my pregnancy and therefore did not perform a D&C.    But said there was little hope I would carry the pregnancy.     I also had an incompetent cervix, so therefore, at 16 weeks, I had a stitch put in to keep the pregnancy, but I put here that TJ kept trying to escape and I had to go to theatre twice more to have another stitch put in -- two more stitches put in.

I went into hospital again bleeding and they found I had a placenta previa, so I was bleeding.     I was admitted in September and never came out again until TJ was born by emergency C-section.     I kept going into labour and they kept taking me to the labour ward, put me on medication via a drip to stop the contractions. So I had many scares, many transfusions and bedrest for three months.

I got to seven months and was allowed to go down to breakfast, but as I finished my breakfast I went into labour.     There was nothing they could do to stop it.     TJ was born at 2 pounds and luckily he had very few problems and they let him out of hospital when he was 4 pounds, just six weeks later.

He was very precious -- this is an understatement. He was meant to be here.      He was a funny, caring, happy child.     That's how best to describe him.   He was tiny for such a long time but a character.     One of his teachers came to the funeral and gave us a class photo she had kept.    She was distraught, saying he was the loveliest child she had ever taught.

He was also a child model and very successful to the age of 7, but he was playing football when they found out.    They ribbed him so much that we went to an audition at Marks -- oh, I'm not allowed to say that.

**Mr Griffin**: Yes, you can.

**Ms Pimm**: -- M&S for a job and he refused to comply with the models' work ethic, to say the least, and that was the last of his modelling career.    Football was his main passion but he was small for a long time.    He was really talented.    People would comment at every game how good he was.    His vision was apparent at an early age, but the other kids couldn't follow his vision and he got very frustrated.   Even the managers couldn't coach him. He was more aware than them.

We moved from Dagenham to Dovercourt in 2000 for a better life, but TJ struggled -- it was probably a wrong time to move, but it was the best thing, we thought -- and rarely went to school.   He was 14 at the time.   But the school sent him to a programme which involved Colchester Football Club and he managed to do two years there and got coaching badges.   By the age of 18 we thought and he thought he would go away with the company to teach football -- coach in the USA, and he did this for two summers -- for two years, sorry.      He was based in Florida and loved it and the kids loved him too.

He did get signed on at 12 for West Ham and did a little while there, but they did not extend his stay as he was so small.   This really upset him.   He ended up being five 9.   The football world is quite cruel.     After this he actually worked for West Ham as a coach in the community, (inaudible) for a year, and then he went on a -- he got a job with First Choice Holidays and spent three years, one in Majorca, one in Cape Verde and the next year in Egypt, doing the children's football sessions.

There he met a girl from Manchester, and when he finished the work with First Choice Holidays he moved up there with her and they had a child, but he found it difficult to stay away from us, being so far away.    He used to go -- he came home, sorry, and he got a very good job in sales in London.    He used to go by train to see his son and sometimes I would go and drive sometimes.

This eventually led to TJ not being able to see him because he once turned up late, Saturday morning, drunk from the night before, after work.    He then rekindled a relationship with the first girl he met when we moved to Dovercourt.   He moved in with her in London and it seemed okay for a while, but this job in London wasn't very good with the culture of drinking and drugs.    This is where his mental health I think started to deteriorate.   I'm not sure if he did have ADHD, but he had OCD as a child, lining his cars up and all in rows even at an early age.

I had to go and pick TJ up from his girlfriend's flat in London as he was getting into debt, gambling, and again to drugs in London and getting payday loans. I think he was bipolar but that was never diagnosed.      He had some medication from a GP -- but took all the tablets -- once in 2015.     He was okay, but he didn't take no more after that and the doctor wouldn't prescribe him any and he wasn't really well looked after by the GP.

He was arrested for criminal damage when I went to pick him up because he smashed his girlfriend's phone, but I was there and I witnessed it, but he did get arrested for it.

We go on to -- he didn't go to court for this. A warrant was issued for his arrest.    Sorry.   The money he was given to go to court he spent on drink, and he actually went to Romford Railway Station and either the transport police or staff noticed him preparing to jump under the train.   He'd been staying with my eldest daughter to give us a break.

From there, the staff took him to my daughter's house, which was just around the corner, and they called an ambulance.   He went to Goodmayes Hospital, where he was sectioned, and me and my husband put our hands together as he would finally get the help he needed, but sadly not to be.

He was sent from Goodmayes at midnight -- and I'm sure it was in a taxi -- to The Lakes at Colchester because he was out of area.    There's no -- hardly any paperwork I believe from Goodmayes.    So he was taken to The Lakes -- sorry, I've lost myself.

**Mr Griffin**: Do you see the paragraph starting "The worst thing ..."?

**Ms Pimm**: Okay, so that was that.    Sorry.

From The Lakes he was deemed to be fine.      He was seen by a psychiatrist and a nurse -- again there was hardly any paperwork -- and he was let out that day. But going on, the next day -- oh, no, I've lost myself. So sorry.     Yes, so he was let out The Lakes and he told me that he was going to get some community help and they'd arranged that, but he didn't.

On Thursday the 25th he was taken to A&E by his probation officer in Colchester.       I went there to pick him up, but they couldn't -- TJ had been -- sorry. I found out after that TJ had been up a car park in Colchester and had told the probation officer and the crisis nurse in A&E that he'd been up there to view it; a reconnaissance sort of thing.      That was on the Thursday, the 25th.     He was not admitted because the nurse said he was drunk and they couldn't arrest anyone if they had a warrant out for his arrest.      She told me to take him to Clacton Police Station to hand himself in and he would be assessed by the duty doctor.

This I didn't do.   I thought that was wrong.   I came home.     I was working the next day at Colchester on 26 August, on the Friday.       TJ said, "I'll come with you and I'll hand myself in at Colchester".      This is all because of a smashed phone.      I dropped him off near the station and went to work.      I remember the last thing he said to me was -- in the car I said, "Why do you want to go Colchester and not Clacton?", and the last thing he said to me, "Because it's bigger".      I didn't realise what he meant.    Little did I understand -- he was dressed in a black tracksuit, baseball cap and trainers, a very hot day.    I tried ringing the probation to see if he got through and I couldn't get through.     I left messages.    Eventually somebody rung me back and said he'd been in -- TJ had been in three times and they were busy.   He'd asked if he could borrow £5 because he was so hot, he wanted a T-shirt.

She said she would ring me when he came back.         He never went back.   I went home.     The police were called -- the police called me and said that basically TJ's life was over.    He'd jumped from the seventh or fifth -- seventh floor of a car park.      He left his baseball cap on top of the car park and the trainers on top of it, which we've still got to this day.

I know he suffered.       A helicopter was called and landed near him, trying to save him.      He suffered horrendous injuries.   I thought a few times of contacting the ambulance service for a report, but I keep stopping myself.      Also there was a lady first at the scene.   She was an ex-nurse and I have her details too, but I still haven't contacted her.   I wonder to myself if he was conscious, if he said anything.

He was always dressed well.    As I said, he left his baseball and trainers at the top of the car park.      I was told he'd jumped backwards.    He was frightened of heights and when he worked in London he used to take -- he wouldn't go -- he would go on the lifts, so I don't understand how he managed to get up there.   I just imagine him being on his own in Colchester, walking up that car park and I was just a mile away.

My husband hasn't worked since, and the impact it's had has been great.    Money-wise, we had to sell our house and moved a few times to cheaper properties, and it hasn't brought us closer, my two daughters and my grandchildren.   It's drawn us apart.   They both suffer, they're both depressed.

I don't know, it's just -- I mean, as I said, my husband hasn't worked, he's -- he hardly goes out now. He don't like talking to people.    He won't even go shopping with me.    So he spends like two/three weeks at a time ... I do think I'm suffering from PTSD and I think he is too.    Yeah, that's all I can say.

**Mr Griffin**: You said at the end of your statement that:

"We miss him more everyday and ... it's not getting [any] easier."

**Ms Pimm**: No, I have dreams and I wake up in the morning and I remember he's not there.

**Mr Griffin**: We’ve got some more photographs to show.    Could you put those up please?

**Ms Pimm**: Can I just add that he managed to get himself a job -- he took himself to Cluttons -- sorry -- in Mayfair and he managed to get a job all by himself.      He used to sell -- the job he was doing in London was business rates -- getting the business rates down for people, and this company didn't know, and they set him up and said he had an office and everything -- that was in the August -- so he was still trying to get through things.     He was offered £40,000 plus commission and he never got to start that job.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

**Ms Pimm**: That's all right.

**Mr Griffin**: Can we show the remaining photographs, please?

*(Images shown)*

**Ms Pimm**: They're not that brilliant because I couldn't go through the albums.

That's in America.

That's in our conservatory when we had the house, doing karaoke.

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last photograph, thank you.

**The Chair**: Mrs Pimm, thank you very much indeed for telling us about TJ.    I appreciate it.

**Ms Pimm**: I didn't think I'd cry that much.   Sorry.

**The Chair**: You've done very well.    Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, the next commemorative account that we will hear will be read by a legal representative.        This is the account of Jodie Harwood about her father, Clive Harwood or Skip, and Adefolaju Sanda will be reading it.

**Mr Sanda**: Good morning, Chair.   I will now read the commemorative account of Jodie Harwood, daughter of Clive Harwood, known to those who loved him as "Skip". She is not present today but is viewing the account from her home.

Statement by Jodie Harwood (read)
---------------------------------

**Mr Sanda**: "Dad was a true adventurer.   He was born in Hackney on the 2nd of November 1957.      At three months old he left the UK on his first adventure with his parents Edith and George and his older brothers.       They travelled across the seas to Australia where they emigrated on the 10-pound pom boat.      They settled in Mount Evelyn, Melbourne.     Dad had a wonderful childhood including learning to ride horses bareback, helping to look after the cattle and swimming in local water holes. Dad got hit by a boomerang on his left eye which left a scar.    He always spoke so fondly of his time in Australia and realised how privileged his childhood in Australia had been.

"Dad was eleven when they returned to the UK, it would have been quite a culture shock for Dad not being used to UK life.    On their return, they lived on Mersea where Dad attended the local school, they eventually settled in.    Dad settled into the Monwick secondary modern school.    By the time he reached his teenage years he was working on market stalls.    From school he started his apprenticeship with the council as a bricklayer. Despite being expelled from college for poor attendance the council kept him on as he was such a good and hard worker.    Dad went on ... to being self-employed, eventually having his own brick laying gang.

"Mum and Dad first met in a night club, they went on to marry and have three children, myself (Jodie) and my other siblings.    Dad loved being a parent and we went on many holidays abroad.    Dad always worked really hard and did well for himself and was determined to give his family a good quality of life.     In 1988 we emigrated to Australia as Dad wanted us to experience this way of life.     We lived in Townsville and spent many weekends visiting Magnetic Island and The Great Barrier Reef.       We used to frequently return to the UK due to our family ties.     After 5 years we returned to the UK.

Dad loved to scuba dive which led him to travel all over the world, he dived the North Sea, Great Barrier Reef, Red Sea, Truk Lagoon and Micronesia.    Dad became a member of a dive club which he loved and was lucky enough to go on sailing trips from New Zealand to Asia and from Hong Kong to Madagascar.

"Dad was also interested in motor cycling, cycling, kayaking, patang, swimming, badminton and the gym.      Dad loved to socialise and had a huge group of friends.      He loved live music and loved a party!   Dad loved to meet his good friends for a steak night.   Dad's final work project enabled his retirement, building a block of flats in Alresford where he also lived.   Dad volunteered for the Autumn Centre, who helped to support elderly and frail people who are vulnerable and lonely, by driving the bus, which he loved to do.

"Dad was always active, loved holidays, his family and was the biggest joker.   Dad was a one off, he would light up a room with his infectious laugh and smile and once met he was never forgotten.    Over the years he would go on ski holidays and weekends away to motor cross with his son.   He loved to take his granddaughters for weekends away in his campervan and shows in London. Grandad was fun to be around, and they were so proud of one another.   His love for his family was always evident, he was a loving Dad and best friend to all three of us and the proudest Grandad to his three granddaughters.    We all loved spending time together, having a meal, bowling, family BBQs and listening to all of his stories.

"The day we found out that Dad had passed will be a day that haunts and stays with us forever.     We had returned from a trip to Paris with myself, my two daughters, my sister and her daughter, and my mum which was the start of celebrating my eldest daughter turning 18 on the 14th of April.      The taxi pulled up at my sister's and once we had started to load the cars with our cases, we realised my brother and my partner were there.   My brother [then] told us that Dad had died and had been found hanging.      I will never forget the ear-piercing scream that came from my mum as she fell to the floor.   We all went into my sister's where my brother told us that we would need to identify Dad the following day.    As we were away, my brother sadly dealt with realising Dad was missing as he had not shown up for a project [he] was working on.     After calling round, my brother was made aware that Dad had been suffering with his mental health and the police were called.       My brother was at his home alone when the police knocked on the door to inform him they had found a body which they believed to be Dad.

The next day after a very sleepless night we made our way to Ipswich hospital to identify Dad.     Once there we were informed that due to miscommunication between the police and staff that we would be unable to identify Dad today and it would have to be [on] the 14th.    After several hours of going back and forth we were able to see Dad and sadly confirm his identity.    We were able to stay with Dad for some time, they covered his lacerations.   Dad just looked like Dad and very peaceful.   We then had to wait for a post mortem and toxicology before Dad's body was released.     We had to wait until the 25th of May before we could say our final goodbyes.   It was evident how popular Dad had been as the crematorium was overflowing.

"Since Dad passed, we have struggled in our communication with the Trust in trying to get clear, concise answers to our questions.   As a result, as a family we have still had no closure.

"Eventually, an inquest was held and the conclusion of the Coroner as to the death states that 'Clive David Harwood known as Skip committed suicide.    On the balance of probability his suicide was more than minimally contributed to at that time by Skip not receiving an appointment with a Psychiatrist shortly before passing'.

"Dad will be missed forever, and his passing has left a huge void within our family.    We are so proud of everything Dad achieved in his lifetime.    He really lived life to the full and cherished every moment. Sadly, we feel that we have been robbed of spending more time and creating more memories with him.    The pain and [the] loss we go through on a daily basis is unmeasurable.    This is why the inquiry is so ... important to us.

"Since Dad's death, we have struggled with intrusive thoughts.   Did Dad struggle?    Did he change his mind and it was too late?    Did he feel any pain, as to our understanding [of] all of Dad's toxicology reports [they] were clear.   Was he scared?    We have struggled to maintain working as normal due to Dad's death and had a loss of income.    16 months on, some days are easier than others.    The pain and heartache that Dad's loss has caused our family, can simply not be put into words.       We will always wonder what if?     What if Dad received the help he so desperately seeked and needed?    Would the outcome have been different if the Trust's processes had been followed correctly?

"People from all backgrounds suffer with their mental health and the help and support that should be there quite simply is not.    The system must change so that families like ours, do not have lives ruined and their time with their loved ones cut short."

**Mr Griffin**: May I ask that the remaining photographs are put up?

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's it, thank you.

**The Chair**: Thanks very much to Jodie Harwood for that. Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: That is it for this morning, so if we rise now and come back again for 2 o'clock.

**The Chair**: 2 o'clock.   Thank you.

*(12.06 pm)*

*(The short adjournment)*

*(2.00 pm)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we have Melanie Leahy here and I invite her to go and stand at the table.       She will be speaking about her son, Matthew Leahy.

**Ms Leahy**: Good afternoon.

**The Chair**: Good afternoon.

**Ms Leahy**: Can you all hear me?

Before I start, I'd just like to say this is a place I fought a long time to get to, for all the wrong reasons.    I've listened the last couple of days to some amazing testimonies, testimonies of truth and love, and I really -- well, yeah, it's heartbreaking.

Statement by Melanie Leahy
--------------------------

**Ms Leahy**: So this is my impact statement, Chair, regarding the death of my only child, Matthew James Leahy. 20 years, who died on 15 November 2012 whilst an inpatient at the Linden Centre in Chelmsford.

**Mr Griffin**: Melanie, may I ask that you move just so the microphones pick you up?

**Ms Leahy**: Sorry.

"Matthew", his name chosen due to its meaning in Hebrew, "Gift of God", that he truly was.     His loss has been felt by many people all around the world.     Not only have I been robbed of my son, I have also been robbed of my dreams.     My world has become a much darker place without the light of Matthew.     How can it be possible I won't see my son again?      I am Matthew's mum and I bear witness for him.     He cannot speak for himself or explain what happened.      My son was dead within eight days of entering a so-called place of safety, the Linden Centre in Chelmsford.

Matthew was a beautiful soul.     He understood compassion and he cared for others.     He was generous, he was kind, he excelled at school and he was smart.      He was funny and in his younger years he actually wanted to become a comedian.     He was quite shy in large groups and was a loyal friend, never wanting to encourage a fight, but would stand up for himself and the ones he loved. He would put himself in harm's way before someone he loved.

He loved the outdoors.    He loved the water.    He had a natural talent for swimming and was a fantastic skier. In his late teens, Matthew saved two ladies from drowning.    He didn't think twice.   It was a pitch-dark winter's evening and Matthew was walking home.      He heard their screams and he jumped into the water and he saved them both.   Yet he himself wasn't afforded the luxury of rescue when he so desperately needed it.     This makes me very angry and sad.

When Matthew became poorly, we turned to so-called professionals for help, to help us understand what was happening and to help us find a way to help our son. I was the parent.    It was my duty to protect my child. I worked hard throughout my life to give him a solid upbringing and teach him morals.      I loved him, supported him, encouraged him and guided him and nurtured him into his adulthood.   Yet eight days in the care of the state and my son died.    I will never come to terms with that.

The last eight days of his life in a place he called "hell" and now I truly believe it was hell on earth. Alone, malnourished, over-medicated, scared, bleeding, bruised, raped, injected multiple times, ignored and frightened.   No records of any staff in those last days of his life offering him any comfort.    I had been advised not to visit the ward to give him time to settle.   I will live with the guilt for the rest of my life that I listened to so-called professionals and I was not there when my son needed me the most.

An inquest into my son's death was held in January 2015.   The jury concluded, on 15 November 2012, at 12.52 pm, Matthew James Leahy was pronounced dead at Broomfield Hospital in Chelmsford, having been found hanging in his room at the Linden Centre on the Galleywood ward.

The coroner could not call suicide so gave an open narrative verdict, which concluded that my son, Matthew James Leahy, was subject to a series of multiple failings and missed opportunities over a prolonged period of time by those entrusted with his care.      The jury found that relevant policies and procedures were not adhered to, impacting on Matthew's overall care and well-being leading up to his death.

I sat in that inquest courtroom amongst directors and managerial staff from the North Essex Partnership University Trust for five brutal days.    Not one of those directors or managerial staff present offered apologies or even spoke to me and, after the verdict was delivered, they all left from the rear of the building.

Writing this statement has been difficult.      Memories I had laid to rest have been flooding back.   My understanding of events repeatedly having to be explained to each organisation that has failed not only Matthew but my entire family and circle of friends. Life will never be the same for any of us.

Matthew taught me so much in life and continues to teach me so much in death.   I stand here today not just representing my son but representing the multitude of lives that have been affected by the inadequate care offered by mental health services.   Although I cannot address every person's life that has been affected due to the failings made, I want to express the effects that I have personally witnessed and felt in my own life.

There is no way I was prepared for my son's death. I stand before you a broken person who has lost every sense of normality, a person who needs to grieve the loss of Matthew not only for myself but for his unborn children, my unborn grandchildren and for the world that has no idea what a wonderful person they are missing.

Since I first held my son in my arms as a baby, I always expected to live my entire life with Matthew. Now every day and every night I cannot escape the reality and accompanying sadness that my beautiful handsome boy is gone.   The fact he never lived long enough to enjoy and celebrate his 21st birthday has added to my emotional stress and devastation; the pain that comes each time his birthday arrives; the pain at watching his friends celebrate their birthdays, celebrate the birth of their children; his past girlfriends having babies with new boyfriends; each birth reminding me that the little girl or boy born might have been my grandchild, had Matthew survived; never seeing him married or helping decorate his new house.

I have a book of photos now to look at, to remember all our happy memories, a book I never expected or wanted on my bookshelf.      I cannot find the words, if there are any, to explain the devastation and mixture of feelings that I felt when the doctor called to say, "Matthew's been found hanging, it doesn't look good", or the feelings I felt when I found that was a lie.     My son had been dead for over an hour when that call was made. The impact of this, a doctor lying and at such a crucial time, has absolutely devastated my trust in the profession.   I have only been to a doctor once since Matthew died and I dread the day I get so ill I may have to visit one again.

The trauma of Matthew's death was made even worse by the suddenness of his loss and the knowledge of the circumstances in which it occurred.     The immediate aftermath of his death was only the beginning.     When the doctor called to deliver his lie, I fell to my knees, unable to breathe.    My late partner took over the call. He then helped me up off the floor.     Panic now ensued. I needed to get to the hospital and fast.     I wanted to see my son.     I needed to do whatever I could to save him.    "It didn't look good", that's what the doctor said.     "Quick, we need to get to the hospital", the only and automatic response.      I was in no fit state to drive, neither was my poorly late partner.

As luck would have it, my parents were nearby. I remember calling my dad.      I was in total panic.   "Dad, drop what you're doing.      Matt's been found hanging. I need you to drive us to the hospital".     The ten or so minutes it took my dad to get round to pick us up seemed like hours.     He drove so carefully and during the drive my head repeatedly saying, "Dad, put your foot down", willing him to drive faster.      How he must have felt during that drive, I really don't know, but knowledge his grandson could die before we arrived and it could be because he was stuck in traffic must have been going through his mind.    A realisation came over me.   Matthew was dead.     I sat back in that car in silence.   It turned out I was right.

On arrival I overheard who I now know to be a senior director of the Trust say to the other officials at the Linden Centre, "Oh, she's here".    The lack of compassion or empathy whatsoever that I experienced that day will stay with me for the rest of my life.     I wanted to see my son, to go immediately to him.   They wanted to talk about what happened, what I knew.   Then it turned out he wasn't even at the Linden Centre, where I'd been told to go.   He was at Broomfield Hospital.   I was made to wait a good half-hour before I was even allowed to go see him at the hospital.   I was told he was a crime scene. I was only allowed to see him for a few minutes and told not to touch him in any way.    I wasn't even given a chance to say a proper goodbye.

When I walked into that room and saw him laying flat out on the trolley, wearing only socks, boxer shorts and a hospital gown, his eyes open and not breathing, I just wanted to gather him up in my arms, make him breathe, hold him and hug him.   The police officer stood right beside me said, "You must not touch.      He's a crime scene".    I retaliated, "He's my son".   I lent over and I kissed him gently on his forehead, just sobbing, "My baby, my baby".    The police officer shouted, "You touch him again, you will be arrested", then directed an orderly to stand in the corner of the room to watch me, to report if I touched my son again.   I was silent. What was happening?    The shock was overwhelming.   That memory, like many others, still haunts me.

I spent about ten minutes, if that, talking to my motionless, dead, beautiful boy and was called by said police officer into a side room to fill in some forms. These were name, date of death forms, et cetera.     One question I was asked will always be in my mind, "Which undertaker do you have planned?".   I couldn't believe my ears.   My response was, "I have his 21st birthday party planned, not an undertaker".

At this point I apologised.    God only knows why I apologised.   I had to leave the room.   Not only had this man refused me any contact with my son, had offered no chance of his last rites being read but also completely ignored my request for donation of organs or even skin for burns.   I recall offering Matthew's eyes. I know how my son would want to help others.    All the police officer wanted to do was complete his paperwork. At the time I was in a completely confused state. I couldn't think clearly.    Everything was happening so fast, shunted from one place to the next.

Now I stand and think about it, I went into almost remote control mode.   I operated like that for days, being visited by police, social workers, questions as to what I knew or understood, having to go through organising an undertaker, sorting a coffin, sorting Matt's belongings from the hospital, which had literally just been thrown into his bags.     Matthew's mobile phone and computer were missing.      To this day, his computer has never been seen again.      How can items go missing on a secure ward?    I not only lost my son, I lost all his friends' contact details and access to any of his online accounts all in one go.      All his photographs, communications, gone.    So much taken from me in one fell swoop.   "Heartbreaking" is not the word.

My thought process smashed, then minimal sleep, realisation and boom.    It hit like a tonne of bricks. On my knees I fell and a scream emanated from somewhere deep within and out it came; a moment in life no person in this world should ever have to experience.

At a time of trauma and deep emotion, just as I was taking in the loss of my son, the justice system started its move into action.    I lost all control of my son.      He was deemed a crime scene.      The Crown took his body and made me wait before returning him.      Not all the body parts had been returned as requested and I then had to fight for them.    Seven months of fighting only to be informed that Matthew's body parts had been found in three separate filing cabinets and in three different police stations.    Did I want his boxer shorts and socks? Oh, my God, the insensitivity was breathtaking.

The next weeks, months and years, Matthew's death and who was responsible for it became and still is the focus of my life, yet I have not been able to determine or control any of this.      Investigations, reviews, reports, et cetera, all processes that have all happened around me, with me being entitled to some information and some explanation, but little voice, little influence and little power.

I organised an independent pathologist to come with me to view photographs Essex Police held of Matthew. The memory of seeing my son's body cut to pieces and seeing the skin pulled back over his skull is still haunting.   I beg any of you here to imagine the sight of your loved one in that state and it not haunt you for evermore.

My life has been totally destroyed.      I miss my son so much it hurts every second of the day.     I may appear normal enough for the most part, but I will never be normal again.   My life will forever exist in a dual reality, before Matthew died and after Matthew died. I have suppressed strong emotions like anger, hurt and anxiety and these in turn manifest into physical symptoms of angina, panic attacks, sleeplessness, headaches, food issues and irritability, extreme feelings that get triggered in unexpected situations. Every day that I wish I had told him more often how much I loved him, how I wished I'd spent more time chatting, how I wish I hadn't arrived too late that day, how I wish I hadn't entrusted others with his life.

Why aren't I just waiting now for my son to come home for dinner?   Why aren't I moaning at him for walking his muddy trainers on the recently cleaned carpet?    In order to move on at all, I must have the truth.    I need to understand the specifics of Matthew's death.    I need a clear picture of exactly what happened and to this day I do not have that.

I have to live now without my son, with my anger, unable to get the release that forgiving brings as that only comes after the feeling justice has been done and some remorse has been shown.    I ask this Inquiry to do the most thorough investigation possible and set an example to the rest of the mental health providers across our nation to get their establishments up to standard or I fear many, many families will suffer the same losses.

My journey thus far has been a long and arduous one. Each stage along this path has taken many months and over the 12 years to date I've gradually lost all faith, trust and respect as I've faced such intense pain from callous incompetence, systemic failure, antagonism, hypocrisy and prejudice.   I have faced death threats. I have been ridiculed.

Only recently it came to light that a top Government official tried to silence my pursuit to justice. WhatsApp messages sent in 2020 between the then Junior Minister for Mental Health, Nadine Dorries, and the then Health Secretary, Matthew Hancock, were leaked to the Daily Telegraph, showing a deliberate effort to undermine my campaign for a statutory public inquiry and isolate me from other bereaved families.   It sickens me to think an elected politician would turn grieving families against each other.   This has only served to raise even more serious concerns, but this time about my own Government's transparency.   This felt like nothing less than a full frontal stab in my heart.

It devastates me every time I think of the additional lives which have been lost, my late partner being one of them -- you will hear about him at tomorrow's hearings -- and the other patients who have been harmed in the three years of delay which her decision to grant only an independent inquiry will have caused. This delay was foreseeable and something I and ministers in the Government raised at the time.   This revelation has shaken me to the core once again because it impacts not just me but all the families failed in the last three years.   I hope my determination serves as a powerful reminder that truth will find its way no matter what the obstacles.

On a more positive note, my journey has been shared by individuals who have helped enormously in giving of their time, support, above and beyond the call of duty. I am truly thankful for all their help and hope that I can return it by using this horrendous experience to speak out for change and to help those families faced with starting down this same terrible road.   In this way I will feel at least my son's death was not pointless.

A journey I would never had needed to be taking had I been given the truth at the outset.   So far not once has Matthew's death or my family been given the respect deserved.   All the investigations to date have been piecemeal or flawed.   I pray this investigation will be different and will be thorough and will give answers leading to meaningful change and accountability.

Matthew didn't deserve to die.    He had so many plans for his future.   In time I hope his death will have a positive impact on the world and that I will be afforded the truth as to how and why he died whilst he was meant to be safe.    Through that knowledge I hope justice and accountability are afforded and necessary change is made for others who, like I did, look to services when they need safe compassionate compare for their loved ones.    I hope then that I can start to grieve the loss of my son and Matthew will be able to then rest in peace.

Mrs Melanie Leahy, #matthewscampaign.      Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Can we play the video, please?

*(Video played)*

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed for that incredibly powerful statement.    It was very, very moving.   Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: The next commemorative account is that of Keith Borien, and it's about his father, Peter Borien, and I will be reading it.

Could we put up the photograph?

Statement by Keith Borien (read)
--------------------------------

**Mr Griffin**: "Commemorative account: Peter Robert Borien 1927 to 2015.

"It is with a huge sense of pride that I write this commemorative account about this truly exceptional man, my father, Peter Robert Borien.

"Peter was born on 25 October 1927 at ... Cape Town South Africa.    He was one of eight children born to William and Amelia Borien.    William was of French and Dutch ancestry, Amelia's roots were in Scotland.

"William worked as a leather worker in a tannery -- Amelia worked as a domestic maid.    They were a desperately poor family who suffered daily hardships primarily because of William's poor health.      Peter's mother, Amelia, became the main provider of the family and the glue which held the family together.

"William and Amelia were blessed however with a son, Peter, who was honest, extremely hard-working and responsible.

"He was also blessed with a wonderful singing voice. His strong work ethic and singing abilities were handed down to him by his mother, with whom he shared a very close and special relationship.

"From an early age he would sing in his local protestant church choir.     It did not take long for his singing skills to be recognised.    Soon after he became the cantor in his church for which he was paid half a crown every Sunday for his singing at three different Sunday services.   The money would go straight to his mother to help her to feed [the] family.

"Peter attended Wesley Training College, as did, unbeknown to him at the time, his future wife, Ruby Vincent.

After leaving school, Peter worked during the day as a tailor's cutter at Jacques Hau Clothing Factory in Micawber Road, Woodstock and as a travelling salesman during the evenings and weekends.   His reputation as a hard-working young man in the city of Cape Town and the surrounding areas went before him.   When I returned to South Africa later in my life I found that my father's work ethos and his determined approach to life had reached almost legendary proportions through the continuous retelling of stories about my father by his sister and her family.

"In 1947 Peter met Ruby Vincent for the first time. They were engaged the following year and married on 24 September 1949 at St Francis RC Church, Woodstock in Cape Town.

"Peter, willingly gave up his position in the protestant church to marry Ruby, a Roman Catholic.    It led to him being effectively cast aside by the local protestant vicar.

"A year before, in 1948, the South African government introduced a system of social segregation in which the race and colour of a person's skin determined their right of access to jobs, schools, shops, buses and trains.   Separate entrances were created for white people and non-white people in cinemas, museums and shops.   Crude processes were used to determine the colour band in which people were classified, and barriers were put up which immediately limited the educational and employment opportunities for millions of black and coloured people.

"The arbitrary nature of the new system caused confusion and frustration in many families.   In my father's family some of William's and Amelia's children were classified as coloured whilst others were classified as white.   My father was classified as non-white and suffered public humiliation at the hands of the Nationalist Government and its agencies.    He became increasingly frustrated and angry at the way all people of colour were denigrated and intimidated by the authorities.

"Seeing no future for himself and his three children in Apartheid South Africa he decided to take his family to the UK.   His priority was for his three children to have a better life, detached from poverty, so that none of us would have to experience the poverty which he had grown up with in his childhood.

"Selling every possession they owned and using money earned by working on the ocean trawlers Peter bought five tickets for passage on a ship to England.

"In August 1956 my father and mother arrived in Southampton with three young children, very little money and nowhere to stay.

"Needless to say life suddenly became very tough again for my mum and dad.   Those early days were spent with relatives and in centres for the homeless when our relatives were no longer able to assist us.

"I remember months of one-room bedsits, my mother and father going off each day to work and then coming home for one of them to head off for another job in the evening.

"My most vivid memory however was my father trying to sell a packet of cigarettes he had bought from [South Africa] so that he could feed us that evening.

"Somehow my father and mother eked out an existence. My father eventually obtained jobs with two tailoring companies, W Caston and then with Fogel and Sons, where my father's experience as a tailor's cutter was put to good use.   He managed to buy a bicycle and would use it every day, to cycle in all weather conditions, the 10 miles from our home in Tottenham in North London to his places of work in Dalston and Stoke Newington. Strapped to the back of the bike was the cloth he brought home at night to sew in readiness for the next day.

"In 1969 the family moved to Wickford in Essex. Peter continued his work as a tailor's cutter, travelling by car up to London [every] day.     In 1983 he took up the same role with Bender Clothing Company on the Charfleets Industrial Estate on Canvey Island.

"At the age of 60 he decided it was time to start a new career!    Instead of slowing down he went on to work at Metwins, an engineering company in Canvey Island -- a job he held until he was 78.     Working had been a part of his whole being and he wasn't going to stop simply because the official retirement age was 65.

"Peter was the rock on which his family was built. None of his children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren would be where we are today if it was not for him and his belief in the opportunities which might arise from a good education.     Although we all know that education is more than academic qualifications his UK family hold 5 first degrees, 2 masters degrees, 2 doctorates and numerous diplomas and certificates.    He was very proud of us all.

"It is in his honour and his memory that the Borien Educational Foundation for Southern Africa was established in 2004 to assist children living in the poorest areas of South Africa to escape the poverty he endured.    The charity works to support children in 55 schools in the poorest area of South Africa through the educational programmes and activities it runs.   My father's support of the charity's work was always understated but news of our work was always enthusiastically received.

"Peter was an exceptional person.    He was thoroughly decent and hardworking.    He never said a bad word about anyone, never complained about anything and even in his final days never asked for help.    He was always eternally grateful for everything he had, especially before and after meals, thanking God every day for what he had and was always encouraging us to be grateful for what we had, rather than moaning about what we didn't have.   When he was distressed or worried he would sing hymns and songs, the words of which he managed somehow to remember even though some were over 50 years old.

"Peter made his family what it is today and supported each family member to achieve their dreams. He achieved more in his life than I ever will and we all miss him with every breath.

"I thank God that my mother had 65 years with him and that my brother, sister and I had a great father like him.

"Peter died on 11 February 2015, aged 87, 12 days after being discharged from Rochford Community Hospital. He had been wrongly sectioned under the Mental Health Act at Basildon Hospital after becoming unwell on 24 December 2014."

That's the end of the statement.     Could we put up the remaining photos, please?

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the last photo, Chair.

What would be convenient is if we could take our break now and to reconvene at ten past 3.

**The Chair**: I'd like to thank the Borien family for their picture of a remarkable life, yes.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

*(2.38 pm)*

*(A short break)*

*(3.11 pm)*

**Mr Griffin**: The next commemorative account is from Greg and Paula Johnson.    It's about their son, Luke Johnson. And, Chair, Mr and Mrs Johnson are present here with us this afternoon.    This account will be read by me and we have a lovely photo up on the screen.

Statement by Greg and Paula Johnson (read)
------------------------------------------

**Mr Griffin**: "Commemorative account of Luke Johnson.

"Luke was our first-born child in September 1980, we were very young at 19 years old but we were very much in love.    Luke was a beautiful baby and was adored by his grandparents and special to them as their first grandchild.

"Luke enjoyed early school life and was loved by his 3 younger brothers, he was very intelligent and capable of any given task, he could swim like a fish and was a lifeguard at 15.

"He lied about his age to prove he could do it and [he] passed!!

"When he was 16 he was working part time in a garage servicing and fitting gearboxes at weekends, which he loved.

"Luke loved chemistry at school and really understood it.

"He enjoyed photography, and left secondary school with 7 GCSEs.

"At 18 he was a judo Black Belt and went on to teach this in local schools full-time.

"On his motorbike, which he drove frightfully fast and loved this as well.

"He was always tinkering with something, never bored, loved the company of lots of friends and family.

"But for us at 16 things changed because Luke who had never smoked discovered cannabis which would become life-changing for him.    Luke was unfortunately one of the people badly affected by this drug, he sadly by the age of 21 had his first admission to a mental health unit.   He wasn't a party-going bad boy, he just took the wrong path with cannabis and then other drugs followed.

"Happy times were few and far between for the next 13 years.   Repeated admissions for his mental health, followed by begging and then prison.

"Luke was sentenced to 8 months for taking a screwdriver to someone's front door, he didn't touch the door but bottled out of attempting to enter, dropped the screwdriver and left, he was on a lot of drugs, both prescription and street drugs.

"His sentence basically wrecked him and he wasn't fit to serve the sentence for over 10 months.

"He served his time in the hospital wing because he was so unwell and they kept him in by mistake for an extra six weeks with Luke protesting that he should be released, but they didn't listen, upon discovery of their terrible error they threw him out, he was dead within a week.

"We often reflect on how we could have done things differently or better, but we know this is grief.   We think of Luke every day and know that he was unable to cope with life on his own.

"There is no more pain for him which was the worst thing of all to watch him suffer.

"Love you always Luke.

"Mum and dad."

Can we put up the remaining photos, please?

*(Images shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much.

Chair, that is the end of that account.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed for letting us have it.    I'm very grateful.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, there are two more accounts to be read today and they will be read by my colleague Rachel Troup.

**Ms Troup**: Chair, the next account is from Heather Coleman about her daughter, Ellen Armstrong.    I'll be reading that, but, before I do, Heather would like to apologise that she has not been able to attend today and wishes to thank the Inquiry for giving her daughter, Ellen, a voice.    She also says this:

"My heart goes out to all of those bereaved families and friends of our loved ones who should still be with us."

Statement by Heather Coleman (read)
-----------------------------------

**Ms Troup**: "Ellen was born on 13th November 1976.    She was the second of four surviving siblings.    The cot death of a younger brother when Ellen was seven years old and the birth of a sister when she was eight culminated in the breakup of my marriage.      Until that time we lived in East Sussex and then in Tamworth until September 1985 when we returned to Beccles.      There we lived with my parents until I bought a house locally.     All four children were educated in Beccles until the age of 18. During that time I started teaching in September 1989 and remarried in April 1991.      The children all had a very good relationship with their stepfather and were all very close to their maternal grandparents.

"Despite all of the changes during their formative years, all of my children grew up as stable and well-rounded individuals.      They had regular contact and holidays with their father both in Suffolk, at his home in the Midlands and with their maternal grandmother in Yorkshire.

"Ellen grew up to be a very empathic and caring person.    She had a big heart and a fearless attitude to life.     She could be stubborn and wouldn't give up on anything she thought worth fighting for.

"Ellen always said that she had a happy childhood, with a great love of the big outdoors and anything adventurous especially if it involved water!     Along with her siblings she was a strong club swimmer and loved sailing.    School holidays usually involved visits to distant family members, youth hostelling or house swaps. She participated in many trips offered to her by her Middle and High Schools.     The most memorable was a three-year exchange programme to Kenya run by her High School when all participants had to raise the money during the first year, go to Kenya in the second year and to pay for Kenyan students to come to England in the third year.    Ellen spent a week at a High School in Nairobi and two weeks working at a school for disabled children in Mombasa.   The following year each of the participants hosted a Kenyan student for three weeks.

"Ellen was an accomplished clarinet player in her school orchestras at Middle and High schools.     Although she followed the sciences academically, she was imaginative and creative, bubbling over with ideas.

"Following her 'A' levels Ellen undertook a [Teaching English as a Foreign Language] course in London followed by six months in Romania living with a family while teaching English to young children in a local school.   During her stay she had holidays in Transylvania and Egypt.     On her return she taught English to foreign students until she went to Liverpool University to study for her degree in Marine Biology, where her final year was spent on the Isle of Man.   While there she learnt to Scuba dive with her partner, also a marine biologist.   They both continued to build their PADI qualifications while working to support themselves, eventually getting work as Scuba instructors in the Dominican Republic and then in Cyprus with Ellen specialising in teaching young children.   They both scuba-dived around the world and visited the elephants in Chiang Mai, Thailand (a long-held dream).

"Ellen and her partner continued to work together. They spent two years working in Bulgaria until the summer of 2006 when their relationship ended as a result of serious traumatic incidents.   Ellen came home and got medical help.   For the first time she was prescribed with anti-depressant medication which had to be modified to a low dose as she experienced debilitating side effects from the original dosage.

"In 2007 she returned, alone, to Bulgaria to work for 2 years until the summer of 2009.   Although she continued to take anti-depressants the following years were good ones for Ellen, living a full and happy life. To help her recovery she bought a wonderful rescue dog (Trail Hound) and spent hours walking the local marshes. By the following spring she was recovered enough to return to Bulgaria by herself to live and work until 2011 when she came home to work as a carer until the birth of her son in 2013.    She was very popular with her clients, some of whom she maintained contact with after she had left.

"In June 2011 Ellen embarked on a new relationship. All went well until four months before the birth of her son in 2013.    At that stage a number of serious problems developed, all of which Ellen had to cope with while pregnant and [which] led to the end of the relationship. As a family, we did everything we could to help.

"In June 2014 Ellen had to leave [her] rented accommodation and [she] took the opportunity to find housing for herself and [her] son.   Close to the beach and sea she was happy and started to make a new life for herself.

"Between late September 2014 and January 2015, Ellen was devastated by the loss of her beloved maternal grandparents within three months of each other.     At the time I was often with her to help out with her highly energetic little boy who was still a very poor sleeper.

"Despite our warnings that she needed time and space to help her [to] fully recover from the trauma she had experienced over the previous year, Ellen started a new relationship in May 2016.    She was very happy and in October 2016 she announced her pregnancy.   By mid-November she had become increasingly anxious. Looking for causes of her anxiety, she continuously researched online for side effects of an anti-depressant that she had stopped then restarted in early pregnancy. She convinced herself that her actions had caused her permanent brain damage causing the disconnect with her emotions.

"From early January 2017 Ellen's anxiety was so debilitating that she could not be left alone.    I spent weekdays with her and weekends when her partner could not make it (he lived and worked 30 miles away). Following a severe panic attack in mid-March I took her to her antenatal clinic at the local hospital where she was assigned to a psychiatric paediatric nurse.    A nurse who was with her throughout her illness and [who] became a trusted and wonderful support.   Ellen was hospitalised a few days before the birth of her baby in May 2017.

"I will not go into the details of the catastrophic treatment Ellen was subject to as a patient in her final two hospital stays.   She took her own life on 6th April 2018.

"During those [last] few weeks, until her death, I spent every day with Ellen.   It was heartbreaking. She had lost her appetite, was unable to sleep and didn't want to get up in the mornings.   Although she felt completely disassociated from her emotions, she appeared most responsive to her children, playing with them and taking her son to bed every night.      To them and to anyone who did not know her Ellen appeared perfectly normal, responding with her lovely smile and warm nature.   Her inability to emotionally connect exacerbated her deep distress.   She persistently reiterated that she could not go on using phrases [such as] 'the worst nightmare for me ... I've been transported to a place of no return, where every second is hell ... my head can't process anything ... it's like a fog that has physical attributes ... thoughts are on a roundabout and come and go ... whirling around on the periphery of my consciousness ... there's no emotion'.

"To anyone who didn't know her, Ellen presented as normal.   But to me, whenever we were alone, she continuously reiterated her inability to 'feel'.     She believed she was letting her children down.      Nothing could shake her belief that she would never recover from ... permanent brain damage and the loss of her connection to the world around her.

"Ellen was desperate to live.   Her last long letter is completely rational and demonstrates a deep awareness of the consequences of what she intends to do.

"I am in no doubt that the reliance on medication is oversubscribed by far too many psychiatrists including every one of [those] responsible for Ellen's care. There are far too many patients where it does more harm than good, indeed it costs lives.    The boundaries between psychiatry and psychology are not distinct. They overlap and all practitioners should be fully aware of that.   It amounts to a national scandal.

"Ellen had an optimistic outlook on life.      She was compassionate with a wonderful zest for life and adventure.   She had a lovely smile, and was always friendly and a good listener, drawing people to her. Everyone who knew her remembers her sunny personality and [her] infectious giggle.     As a family we are learning to live with these consequences together, trying to do what Ellen would have wanted us to do.

"Grief is multi-layered and such a difficult journey.   We are lucky to have such a close knit and supportive family.   Together we cry and together we laugh.   Although we still cry the happy memories rise to the surface more often.     Within the close family losing Ellen has changed our lives forever, but her love of life and positive outlook underpins the value of family and friends that help us move forward.     To our family every day brings back a myriad of memories, family time spent with her wonderful children (now 7 and 11) who now live apart with their respective fathers but spend time together with us on holidays and short stays.     A memory box that Ellen put together with quotes from both her and her siblings of times remembered from childhood. Small, thoughtful gifts.

"Hindsight has been hard and difficult to deal with. The last eighteen months of Ellen's life were her worst nightmare.   Every clinical intervention failed to lift her from what she called 'a living hell'.    For most of the time when Ellen was not in hospital, I was with her. Although very aware of how ill Ellen was, I never lost hope that a solution could be found.     In the end she found a small window of time when she knew that it would not be me who found her.     Her last four A4 page long letter is rational and full of love for her family and her desire to live.    She had lost all hope and was completely aware of what she was doing.

"Such a devastating and preventable loss inevitably raises feelings of guilt and so many questions.     How could this happen?    What went wrong?   And always, what could I have done to prevent it?    At the time I was very aware of many things that had gone wrong with her treatment and other serious concerns raised by the RCA report.

"The anger I experienced was overwhelming.     The impact it had, not only on myself but on my close family made me determined to do something about it. I undertook a six-week course of CBT which allowed me to start doing something practical about finding answers to those questions.       That journey has been cathartic and helped me in so many ways but would not have been possible without the support of my family, especially my husband and some wonderful new friends along the way, people fighting for change.

"Hindsight is a wonderful thing.         I only wish I knew then what I know now.      I now have two goals in mind:

"1) For the NSFT to acknowledge that they knew about but did not act on a pattern of serious concerns that had been evident for years.        Concerns that cost far too many preventable deaths.

"2) For all psychiatric clinicians to realise that medication can do more harm than good and to be open to alternative treatments.        They should all be fully aware that psychiatry and psychology are not mutually exclusive disciplines."

Could we have the remaining photos?       Thank you.

*(Images shown)*

**The Chair**: Thank you, Ms Troup.       Will you make sure that we convey our thanks to Heather Coleman?

**Ms Troup**: Of course.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Ms Troup**: The next account, we see a photograph, if that could go up, please, of Annie Cooper, provided by Robert Cooper, along with some further information about her which I will read.

Statement by Robert Cooper (read)
---------------------------------

**Ms Troup**: "Anne, born [on] 16th April 1963 in Tripoli to Joan and Edwin Cluff.      She returned to England with her family when she was two years of age and grew up in Harlow with her sister and brother.     Anne married Robert Cooper in 1982 and they spent twenty three years together happily married, [and] blessed with three children.   Anne enjoyed working with the youth service, libraries and at Homestead School.     She helped many young people to cope with their own lives and put her all into caring and supporting others."

Chair, that is the end of that account.

**The Chair**: Thank you, and, again, will you please thank Mr Cooper very much?

**Ms Troup**: Of course.

That is the last account for today and I understand that we'll return at 10.00 am tomorrow.

**The Chair**: Thank you all.

*(3.32 pm)*

*(The hearing adjourned until Wednesday, 18 September 2024 at 10.00 am)*

