.. raw:: html

   <a id="hearing-link" href="https://lampardinquiry.org.uk/hearings/hearing-day-08-commemorative-and-impact-accounts/">Official hearing page</a>

Hearing Day 08
==============

.. raw:: html

   <details id="hearing-meta" open>
        <summary>
            <span class="open">Hide video</span>
            <span class="closed">Show video</span>
        </summary>
   <lite-youtube videoid="XiFfKGi2gJQ" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   <lite-youtube videoid="YRSCa24U0Jw" params="rel=0"></lite-youtube>
   </details>

*(10.00 am)*

*(Proceedings delayed)*

*(10.07 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, today is the final day of commemorative and impact evidence in this September session.

Again, we will be hearing about some distressing and difficult matters, and I refer again to the emotional support service that's available, which is overseen by the Inquiry's chief psychologist.    Counsellors are present here today, they're wearing black lanyards and, for those in the room, they're sitting just at the back here.     Further information about services is available on the support services page of the Inquiry's website. That's at lampardinquiry.org.co.uk, or just by coming up to a member of the Inquiry team.    We're wearing purple lanyards and we can point you in the right direction. As I've said every day, we want all of those engaging with the Inquiry to feel safe and supported.

Chair, the first commemorative account today comes from Margot Binns on behalf of her family, and it's about her father, Roland Guy, or Ron.    I will be reading it, but Margot is here with her sister Kathleen Hodgeson, as I read.

Statement by Margot Binns about Roland Guy
------------------------------------------

**Mr Griffin**: With this commemorative account, I am representing the rest of my family, particularly my mum, brother and sisters, so I'll use a collective term in place of "I" in much of this account.

I'm afraid I don't have the capability to commemorate a man as complex and entire in character as my dad within eight pages, but here goes.

Our dad, Roland Guy, preferred to be known as Ron. He grew up mainly in Dagenham, one of three boys.     His mother did have a longed for girl, but her death as an infant impacted heavily on the family, especially dad's mother, Dorothy.   Dad's father, Frank, was a train driver who had served at the Somme in World War I.

Dad was a respectful, athletic and intelligent son with a rebellious streak.    His mother was very house-proud.   Dad being a rough and tumble boy with lots of energy was often in trouble.    His two brothers were less athletic and more studious.    Dad always said his mum was a good cook and he was always well clothed and well fed. If dad needed reprimanding, his father would give him the belt as directed by his mother, which was a fairly normal punishment in most of the nearby households at the time.

Dad signed up with the RAF when the Second World War began.   He was only 15 years old but eager to serve his country.   His father, having lied about his own age when he enlisted in World War I, suspected as much and informed the RAF of his true age.   But the moment dad was legally old enough, on his 17th birthday, he joined the Royal Marines.    Soon after he enlisted they asked for volunteers for hazardous duties and dad stepped forward.   He didn't know at the time he was to be trained as a Commando, which were a new force at the time.

Dad spent the next two years training, mainly in Scotland and Wales, in preparation for the invasion of France and Germany.    He was trained as a sniper, in rock climbing, explosives and unarmed combat.   He was recruited into the 30th Assault Unit, an intelligence gathering force, whose commander was Ian Fleming, later to become the author of the Bond novels.    A sub-unit of 30AU was X Troop, which was so secret it did not exist. Dad served in this unit too.

Dad never really spoke about his actions in the war, he'd signed the Official Secrets Act after all, but he would offer an occasional snippet of information, always retreating if pressed for further information.   I can remember him saying when he passed out and received his green beret it was one of the proudest moments of his life.

His unit landed in France in June 1944.      On their first night at Sainte-Mère-Église, they were strafed with gunfire from the air.    Some of the comrades, who had become like brothers to him over the past two years, were killed, and many wounded.     At this time, dad was just 19 years old.   His unit made their way through northern France, mainly concerned with the V1 and V2 rockets sites and secret weaponry.    They arrived in Vannes, Brittany in August 1944.     This is where he met mum, who was in the French Resistance.

Our French grandmother, aunt and mum were later awarded certificates from the American President Dwight D Eisenhower for service to the American people, hiding airmen who had been shot down over France, getting them through an escape network and back to England.

Mum had been a student at the Beaux-Arts when Blitzkrieg cut her studies short.    She was eight years older than dad and considered French bourgeoisie.       Dad was from the East End of London and from a very different class, culture and background.    I'm sure they would have never met in normal circumstances.

Dad was only in Vannes for two weeks and met mum there a handful of times.    Our grandmother was helpful to dad's unit as she spoke perfect English and could pass on a certain amount of intelligence concerning German positions and resistance networks.    Therefore, the commanding officer, along with dad, came to their house a few times.    Mum and dad then continued getting to know each other, corresponding by letter, this courtship by post culminating in their marriage early in 1947.

Dad's unit was sent to Germany in 1945 where they continued their intelligence work, mainly directed at V1 and V2 rocket technology and the apprehension of German scientists.

Once the war was over, dad was sent to Hong Kong. He was in Hong Kong for nearly two years.    One of his main duties was guarding Japanese prisoners of war before their trial.    He became particularly close to some of these inmates, going into their cells to learn jujitsu, also exchanging small gifts.    In later life he did speak of what he considered the injustice meted out to some of these low ranking soldiers.    He felt that the true commanders and perpetrators of hideous war crimes often escaped the death penalty because they were tried later, once the fervour of war had subsided.    Instead the truly responsible were given lighter sentences and it was the foot solders, many of whom dad became friendly with, who were those given the harshest penalty of death.

Dad's duty was to guard these prisoners, take them to the courthouse, march them to the gallows and watch them hang.    Dad was only 20 and 21 years old during this period.

The one person in the world he would confide in was our mum.   He adored her and she him, and he was immensely proud of her many talents.     In her opinion, it was not the liberation of France, nor the invasion of Germany, which damaged dad's mental well-being.     In France he met the love of his life and helped liberate an occupied people.    In Germany, he helped halt the proliferation of advanced weaponry aimed at his countrymen.    It was in Hong Kong, in the stillness of peace, the real damage was done.

Dad had signed up for 12 years, unlike many of his comrades who were ‘hostilities only’, so were on civvy street once the war was over.    Dad did not want to wait until 1954 to be with mum.     He did not want to serve his country by taking young men like himself to the gallows to watch them die.    The only possibility to escape this mental torture would be to buy himself out, which he could not afford.     He had to find another way to be discharged.

The correspondence between mum and dad from 1944 to late into 1946 serves to verify much of what dad insisted was the true history of his mental illness and his subsequent discharge from the forces on medical grounds.   He was eager for us to know his initial stay in a mental hospital in 1946 was orchestrated by himself and it had no bearing on his problems in later life.     He saw mental illness as a shameful weakness, especially in himself.

But whatever the truth, he must have been a desperate man.   Even though the letters between our parents were censored at the time, it is obvious they longed to be together and dad had a plan to leave Hong Kong so he could marry mum and leave this torturous existence behind him.

Dad said he feigned a mental breakdown in order to be sent home.   Dad carried out his plan and was given a lumbar puncture (which at the time was believed to ease pressure on the brain).     He was then boarded on to a hospital ship and caged deep down in the dark of the ship without windows.     The mentally ill were allowed on deck occasionally to take air.     Dad ventured out of his caged dungeon and on to deck once during the whole six-week voyage as he couldn't bear a repeat of the humiliation he suffered the first and only time an audience of passengers staring and pointing, mocking the mentally ill.

We are proud of our parents' role in the war.     Dad's small role to find V1 and V2 launch sites, retrieve secret documents deep within burning mines and from booby-trapped bodies undoubtedly saved lives.    This new weaponry was causing destruction and terror in our cities and the necessity to understand and halt what were the first ballistic missiles was essential to winning the war against the Nazis.

He never collected any of his campaign medals, believing he didn't deserve them as he was no hero.    The heroes, in his mind, were those who never came home. But we know survivors like mum and dad do not go through war and come out the other side unscathed.     They spend their lives as the walking wounded.   Dad bore a living sacrifice with painful memories he buried deep within and never spoke of, but we can piece together a little of his suffering.

Regardless of all his training and intelligence, many like our dad felt they were left on the scrap heap and found it difficult to get work after the war. Despite the dreadful treatment he endured as a mentally ill patient the previous months, he was determined to provide for his now wife and growing family.

Dad became a heating engineer, running jobs mainly at oil refineries, industrial sites, schools and universities.     Mum had five girls and one boy over the next ten years.    Our parents bought their own home and dad worked very hard over the next 50 years.     Not bad for someone who suffered from depression and undulating moods.   We had a frugal upbringing, despite mum's heritage.   The wealth was and always remained in France, but this is another story.

As children, we knew dad had a temper and would avoid making him angry, running for cover when we did. He was, however, a very kind and generous person.     He installed central heating to many of our neighbours' houses, only ever charging for materials, giving his labour and time for free, even when money was short in our own home.     Give dad a screaming baby and he would pace up and down tirelessly, singing ‘Swing Low, Sweet Chariot’ in smooth baritone, soothing and rocking gently until the infant in his strong arms, no matter how long it took.

He was a deft, self-taught tap dancer.     He taught us how to knit, play cribbage, chess and bridge, his grandchildren too.    He would sit alongside mum at her easel and capture the scene wonderfully with a sketch pad and charcoal.   He was social and friendly, but would have bouts when he would get down in the dumps and sometimes go to bed for a week or two, lose his appetite and not want to involve himself in much at all.

The rest of the family would carry on as normal, knowing dad would eventually pick himself up and carry on.   This was dad's pattern for decade after decade until he went to see a GP, subsequently being placed under the care of Essex Mental Health.

A doctor prescribed him antidepressants of some kind.    This, for unknown reasons, was the doctor's first and only approach, no offer of counselling or getting to the root of any problem.    The doctor didn't even know dad, he had never treated him before.    The doctor was not a psychiatrist or a specialist in mental health, he was a general practitioner.    We feel this was an irresponsible and neglectful approach.

Dad had never taken any medication for his problems until this point in his life.   He had never had any help at all from outside his family.   The antidepressants were prescribed in 1994.    Even though dad had proudly and freely given to his country, he only asked just once for anything in return, and he was let down. Appropriate, effective help was not given.

The visit to the doctor was the catalyst, when we all witnessed him change beyond our recognition, never to see the dad we'd previously known again.    Only little glimpses.   The undulating mood changes, which would take years to complete a cycle and he'd always experienced, became mountainous highs and the deepest lows.    This new cycle would complete in very rapid succession then start all over again.

After taking the antidepressants, dad experienced a high we found frightening, followed by the one and only time he overdosed in an attempt at suicide.     He'd never tried to kill himself before.    Our dad was brought up in a prudish, Victorian and careful household, and yet suddenly he'd become a completely different person.

I will try to describe as best I can this new pattern of his and our suffering.

He begins making lewd and suggestive jokes, which makes us feel extremely uncomfortable, especially coming from our prudish, Victorian dad.    He is normally friendly and sociable but he becomes loud and dominating.   Our frugal dad visits jewellery shops and buys us all gifts, spending hundreds of pounds at a time, lavishing money he'd worked hard all his life to earn.   We consider getting power of attorney to stop him spending his own money.     He knows everything, a fountain of all knowledge.   He talks and laughs incessantly. Conversation is one-sided, it is never your turn.      His laughter booms from wall to wall.    It's embarrassing and unpleasant being near him.    Saying this about the dad we love and our children love makes us feel terribly sad and guilty, but it's the truth.   He has a gargantuan appetite which cannot be satisfied, he stokes this high with cakes and coffee.   His whole demeanour is manic, loud and exaggerated.

Gradually the laughter disappears, he shuns company because it's distracting him from his obsessive mission. This quest is serious business.   He stays up all night composing letters to MPs, the Prime Minister, the multitude of bureaucrats he detests, and the one or two he admires.    As the days pass, the writing becomes less legible and the content more bizarre.   He draws colourful patterns and in his mind they signify something.    There is an all-consuming urgency to chronicle his message.   He has invented a new language of bold swirling colour, thick lines at the outer page edge squeezed down to central infinity.   It is necessary to communicate in this visual code.   If not, Bill Gates, MI5, the Pentagon, our family's doctor and even the newspaper boy will give his secrets away to them.     Spies have been infiltrating his TV and telephone.   Only a genius on a similar astral plane will have any hope of understanding his ciphered clues for help.

We don't recognise this person.    We cannot identify with him at all.    Our ageing mum is distraught and bewildered.     She begins to retreat into a world of her own.

Anger and frustration ooze from him.     He paces like a caged gorilla as he struggles to express himself.         He cannot.     There is so much he wants to say, but he can't verbalise any more.    Each sentence begins with a stifled energy that queues impatiently like a traffic jam at the tip of his tongue, bunching up behind the barrier of his clenched teeth.     Unable to escape into words, a few stunted grunts relieve the building pressure of frustration.    He unsuccessfully attempts to speak again and again.

Dad wants to lash out, bang and crash, his eyes are murderous, I think he wants to hit me.        We avoid him, so he begins to believe no one understands, no one cares. Dad sighs a lot.    Lungs full of air expel their content in sharp bursts of despair.    We prepare for a deeper plunge.     He knows what is coming.   His deep blue eyes glare with terror as though he is descending into hell. He reaches and grasps to save himself, like clawing fingernails screeching against the impenetrable sides of his black hole, he is sliding, slipping, he cannot cling on.    Screaming tinnitus rebounds around his brain.

He takes to his bed and stays there.    Dad is not hungry, he does not eat or drink.   He must be coaxed or he will starve.    He doesn't want to touch or be touched. His soul has been sucked away into a black void.   His deep blue eyes are empty, there is no one in, vacant, silent, nothingness. For us peace, relief and guilt.

We can breathe, we can recharge, we can pretend he doesn't exist.    How horrible this makes us feel to say this about our dad.    This becomes his extreme pattern of suffering, one phase leading to the next in a continual and rapid cycle of agony for all concerned.

This sequence of behaviour accelerates so the whole process from mania to deep depression covers a period of a couple of months.    This is his life for 12 years until he dehydrates and starves himself to death under the care of Essex Mental Health Services.

Many times we would try to contact and engage health professionals to help our dad during each of these phases.   The health professionals only ever seem to step in and propose any help at all when the situation became desperate.

And dad was deeply depressed.   He was regularly sectioned during the depressive phase and taken to Runwell Hospital.

No problem at all.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Each time he was there, we were pressured to give our consent to electro-convulsive therapy.      We were told our dad is willing to have it.      This would always be when dad was deeply depressed and starving himself.        If someone had asked dad if he would like to end his life at this time, he would have agreed to it, so it was a ridiculous proposition, and inappropriate to be pressurised in this way.      We knew in his logical state dad would not want it.    We had to fight his corner.      He was incapable.

Dad's extreme suffering began in 1994 and ceased with his death in 2006.      We feel this extreme suffering could have been avoided with appropriate health and care.   We hate the fact he suffered in this way, and we hate the fact he did not get the right help.      These feelings give rise to our own self-hate.

Our dad lived a full life.      We are grateful for that, as we know many who were failed had been denied this.   All sufferers and their loved ones are in our thoughts and prayers.

We will give credit where credit is due, though. Runwell Hospital was set in beautiful surrounding countryside, green grass, trees and rabbits visible from every angle.        As dad improved we'd go for walks in the grounds and sit outside and have a cup of tea, even take him out to lunch at a local pub.    The immediate world outside his ward was conducive to him wanting to get well.   Sadly it is now a luxury housing development.

In the days before his death, dad was transferred from Runwell Hospital to Southend General Hospital.       He was badly dehydrated and in a poor physical state.     When it was obvious dad had no hope of surviving this last starvation ordeal, the sister at Southend Hospital allowed his children and grandchildren to gather round his bed to say a final farewell, and they were there by his side as he took his last laboured breath.    He was taken long before his time but his suffering was, after 12 long and tortuous years, finally over.

Chair, that is the account.

**The Chair**: Can I thank you for a really eloquent account of an admirable man.   Thank you.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, there will be two people at the table next, yes.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: I invite Adam and his wife to come up to the table, please.

Chair, we hear now from Adam Rowe, who will give his commemorative statement about his mother, Amanda Hitch, and Adam is accompanied by his wife, Dr Maxine Feldman.

Can you put up the photograph, please, and Adam, please start whenever you feel ready.

Statement by Adam Rowe about Amanda Hitch
-----------------------------------------

**Mr Rowe**: Thank you.

Amanda Hitch was my mother.   As a child I lived with my mum and dad in Ongar, Essex.      When my younger brother was born we moved to Clacton-on-Sea.

My mum worked as a lunch time assistant at my primary school.       When I was 8 years old we moved to Chelmsford for my father's work.       My mum then worked as a teaching assistant at a primary school where she loved her job and worked really hard at it whilst also running the household.

My parents separated in 2011.    My mum's mental health started to deteriorate shortly after.       My mum, who was not usually an angry person, started to get angrier about everything.       She also became increasingly hyperactive.

In and around 2010 my mum left the family home with my brother.     She moved into a barge boat in Chelmsford. One of the reasons for this was that she didn't have much money, but to my mind this was also an indication that things weren't quite right.       She also left her job during this phase because she felt she was being pushed out.    I recall her being very angry about the fact that she had been told by her line manager that she was not performing as she used to.

After she left that job, she had various jobs such as waitressing at a pub and working in a park café. I remember an air of financial uncertainty during this period.     My brother, who was living with my mum at the time and studying for his A levels, also had to work part-time.

My mum's condition continued to deteriorate.   She became increasingly anxious and rarely left the house because she was nervous about seeing other people.

My mum was admitted to the Linden Centre, Broomfield Hospital in Chelmsford in 2014.    I understand that she was suffering with psychosis.     She told me that she was hearing voices in her head and she thought building were moving and talking to her.     She bit her nails until she did not have any left and the nail beds were bleeding.

When I visited her in hospital, she told me that someone was trying to kill her.    Even when I was able to have "normal" conversations with her, there was an undertone of psychosis.     For example, she would mention that the buildings were moving midway through conversation.     It was clear that this was extremely distressing for her.    It was heartbreaking for us, as a family, to see her level of distress.

By this time, it was very clear that my mother was seriously unwell.   She had always been so very independent and had held down multiple jobs and had been such a stable force in our childhood.   It felt like the roles had been reversed.   I was now the carer. I wondered whether she would ever recover.

I felt extremely frustrated by the failure of staff to listen when I tried to convey to them all that my mum had been able to do, ie run a household, look after her children, do well at her job and live independently. She had also obtained a qualification from the University of Cambridge, which she was very proud of. I did not feel that the Hospital or the community staff understood or appreciated the rate of decline in her condition.

After around nine months she was discharged.   With my help she sold her house in Writtle and bought a house in Clacton-on-Sea, which is where I'd spent most of my childhood, and this is probably where my mum had her fondest memories.   However, it became clear to me that my mum could no longer live independently.   For example, when I would leave her house she would phone me about 20 times afterwards and tell me that she was worried the walls were going to fall in.

Shortly after her separation from my dad, my mum found a partner who cared for her a lot.     He started to stay at her house to care for her, but this was not enough by way of support, and then mum moved into his house.   Mum had about three further hospital admissions during the next five years.   She was admitted following suicide attempts.    For the majority of the rest of her life she remained in what was clearly a very depressed state and actively suicidal or consistently expressing a desire to die.

I had a very close relationship with my mum.    As her mental health declined I viewed her as someone who needed my support.

When I was a child she had provided me with an infinite amount of support.   For example, she planned every single day of our summer holidays, ensured our homework was always completed.   Even as I entered my mid-20s she would book my favourite restaurant with cake and decorations for my birthday each year.    Her love for my brother and I never wavered and was about the only thing that gave her some happiness.   I felt like I could rely on her if I was going through a difficult time, and as she became more unwell I felt like it was my turn to step up.

When she lived with her partner I saw her about once a week, or at least once a fortnight.    We went out for the day to places like Epping Forest.    I was conscious that she would not organise activities for herself and that when I left she would remain in a depressed state and mainly stay in the house until we next saw her.      As such, there was an undertone of sadness to our trips and there was an element of it being a chance to check in on her mental health.    My mum would sometimes cry when our day came to an end.

I felt like I was the only one who was pushing her to get better.   On several occasions she stopped taking her medication, and I felt that this was not tackled by the mental health teams.     I implored the mental health services to find an alternative to the oral medication which she was taking and, as a result of my challenge, she was offered a depot injection to form part of her regime of medication.    I felt that the clinical team should have been more proactive in this decision rather than responding to a suggestion from a non- medically trained patient’s family member.

My brother went to university and then moved to complete his postgraduate degree.    As he lived far away I did not want him to share the burden of our mum's condition.   I felt that it was my responsibility to ensure that she took her medication and attended her medical appointments.    I tried to shelter my brother as much as I could.    This inevitably put a lot of pressure on me, not only to support my mum on a practical level, that is to deal with appointments, life admin and phone calls with the care team, but it was also emotionally draining and lonely.

In around 2020 I realised that my mum's condition was not improving and that her partner was unable to meet her needs.    I felt that my mum would never get better again.     I thought that if she lived for the next ten to 15 years it would be a miracle.    It felt like I was dealing with someone with a terminal illness as I was convinced she would die by suicide.    As such, I wanted to make the most of our time together.

I organised a trip to Ramsgate with my brother and mum in September 2021.    This was the first time we had been away together since I was a teenager.    My mum brought board games, we went for walks.    It was so nice to spend quality time with her and to see her enjoying herself.

I started to research into sheltered accommodation for her to move into.    She was encouraged by this idea because she wanted to regain her independence whilst being supported.    My mum chose accommodation in Ongar, which we felt provided an appropriate level of support.

My mum had mixed feelings about the supported accommodation.    I knew she was -- I think she knew she was not going to get a better place, but it was difficult for her to be surrounded by people significantly older than her, mum being in her late 50s at this time.    She often made comments such as, "Who knew you'd be doing this for me when we used to do this for nanny", referring to her mum who also lived in a care home with dementia for the latter part of her life.

We had some good times together during this period yet her severe depression and suicidal intent never lifted.

In 2021 she hosted us for Christmas.    She put up a Christmas tree and bought us sacks with presents in them.     This was a really important event as it gave her some independence and was something she used to do for us as children.    However, this was a rare event.   For the majority of the time, up until her death, mum remained very unwell and suicidal for much of the time.

On 12 February 2022, I arrived at home around 9.30 pm.    I was alone in my flat as my partner was away. I heard a buzz at the door at 10.30 pm.    When I opened the door and saw British Transport Police I knew immediately that my mum had committed suicide.    The BTP told me that there had been an incident that had resulted in my mum's death.    I went into shock.     The BTP stayed with me until my partner arrived at the flat. I did not sleep that night.    I had images of what happened in my head.    I had long anticipated that moment but it still felt surreal.     I had so many questions: was this time any different?     Did she leave a note?    Did she try to call me?

My brother was at a friend's house that evening, so I decided to contact him the next day because I felt it would be detrimental to his welfare to tell him that night.    The next morning I drove to my brother's friend's house and told him about mum's death.       He went into shock too.

My brother, his partner, my partner and I stayed together for four days to support each other.     We then relocated to my father's house to sort out the practical things, such as organising the funeral.

The rest of the family feels a huge gap left by the loss of my mum.     I often sit and reflect on how sad her life was and how with better support this needn't have been the case.    But before she was unwell and during her occasional periods of wellness my mum was the perfect mum.     If I ever had friendship or relationship issues I could talk to her as a friend and source of support. She wanted me to do well in school, but if anything went wrong I could always go to her.     I could call her any minute of the day and she would be there.     She always wanted my brother and me to go to her house to spend time with her.      She was so proud of us.   She would light up when she spoke about our work and university                    achievements. She pushed herself out of her comfort zone for us.       When I was at university in Birmingham, she drove there to see me, even though she hated driving.     On another occasion she organised a surprise birthday dinner for me and arranged for my closest friends to attend. I remember these times with great fondness.

Mum's death has not only devastated me but has left a hole in our family.      Both my brother and I miss her terribly.

**Mr Griffin**: Could you put up the remaining photographs, please.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the final photograph.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much indeed, very much appreciated.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: The next account today is that of a person the Inquiry is referring to as FD4.     It's about their son, who the Inquiry is referring to as PD2.

Chair, the use of ciphers instead of names in no way detracts from the very human nature of what you're about to hear, and it will be read by Rachel Troup, Counsel to the Inquiry.

Statement by Fd4 about Pd2
--------------------------

**Ms Troup**: PD2 was a very much wanted and loved child.   He bounced into our lives, a beautiful baby boy, full of smiles and cheekiness.    It was a joy to have and to love him.

As I am one of three girls in the family, a boy was a great addition.    My sisters, along with grandparents, were excited and happy for us to welcome this new addition.

PD2 grew into an inquisitive toddler, always keen to learn a new skill.    He was only nine months old when he practically walked unaided to his Christening.    He seemed to reach many milestones much earlier than expected.

When PD2 was three years old, his father was posted overseas.    He and I followed, where we maintained our family unit.    The time we spent there was happy.   He joined a pre-school group to make friends and learn through play, which he enjoyed.

Before PD2 was due to start regular school, we returned to England in time for the reception class. His sister arrived the same year, and it was a joyous occasion.     We were a very happy and contented family.

PD2 approached school with the same inquisitiveness he had had as a toddler, always wanting to learn new skills.     This approach was repeated throughout his schooling.    Friendships were formed, various after-school clubs were found and attended.      He was a popular participant, and soon sifted through the activities he wanted to pursue.

His grandparents idolised him, he really was the apple of their eye.    PD2 regularly spent weekends with his grandparents, and he adored their company.     They took him to various theme parks and events that he was interested in, particularly the WWF wrestling.

PD2 also enjoyed swimming and playing the keyboard. Because the interests in keyboard progressed, lessons were introduced and attended in order to take that further.    He had some success with the keyboard, being entered into local competitions which he enjoyed taking part in.

He enjoyed all the family holidays.    He was very well travelled, and developed a varied palate, trying all types of food.

After school finished, PD2 went to college, but decided to take his chances by gaining a position in a London bank, an administration role.    He soon realised that this was not for him.   Being in the office environment was not where he wanted to be.

He gained a role with a local construction company where he learnt the basics of the building trade.    Once he had completed the training, his uncle took him on to work with him in the building trade.     He worked well with his uncle and enjoyed the freedom of working outside in the summer months.

The impact of PD2 taking his life has left a huge gap in our lives.   The missed family events, the missed birthday and Christmas celebrations, the daughter he will never see grow up, the milestones achieved in his daughter's life never to be seen by him.     He is an uncle.   Sadly he will never know his nephew.

We will be forever asking ourselves why he was released when it was clear to us things were not right. To be told that I and my daughter were not allowed to see or talk to him when he was an inpatient will forever be etched in my brain.   To release him without an appropriate plan in place for follow-up was arrogant, with no duty of care applied, unprofessional, resulting in a devastating end.

How will we pick up the pieces of that fateful day? It is a question we will never know the answer to.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that's the end of that statement.

**The Chair**: I'm grateful for it, thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: We come to the stage in the morning where we will take our break, and I suggest that we reconvene at 11.20.

**The Chair**: 11.20, thank you.

*(10.48 am)*

*(A short break)*

*(11.23 am)*

**Mr Griffin**: The next commemorative statement is by Carole Stokes.    She will be talking about her son, Lee Spencer, and present with her at the table are her two children, Ben and Charlie Spencer.      May I ask that the photo is put up, please.    Carole, please start whenever you feel ready.

Statement by Carole Stokes about Lee Spencer
--------------------------------------------

**Ms Stokes**: Lee Henry Spencer was born on 23 September, which was yesterday, 1998, at 4.26, in Harold Wood, Romford.

He was the youngest child of three, having an older brother, Ben -- sorry.    That's wrong.     Having older brother Ben and Charlie, his sister.      We lived in Romford area until August 2017 when we moved out to Coggeshall.

Until Lee was four, we lived with his dad.      The marriage then came to an end.   Lee moved with me and his siblings to a new home locally so that the change was not too big for the children.

His dad started a new relationship and moved to Wales permanently from 2006 and then marrying in 2009. He did maintain a relationship with the children, collecting them every other weekend and taking them on holiday once a year.    This lasted until teenage years when for one reason or another the visits dwindled.     He did still see them over the years but not as regularly.

From an early age, Lee was so energetic.   He loved playing sports, he loved playing games in the garden, and could brighten up anybody's day with his cheekiness.

All our memories with him are of him being up to something, whether he was playing football, hockey, skating, climbing or even playing on the PlayStation. One memory in particular I remember fondly was going to watch Lee play for the school team, and they were winning the game, and the ball being mainly at the other end of the pitch.   I remember that I looked at him in the goal, and Lee was scaled at the top of the goal as and was using the top bar as a monkey bar practising his gymnastics because he was bored.

He was very caring and loved by everybody.   His relationship with his nieces and nephews was amazing. They loved him so much.

Lee continued through his schooling locally in Romford.   He was always a challenge due to his hyperactivity, which was useful when it came to sport. He represented all of the schools he went to in various sports, including football, running and swimming. Although he was unable to concentrate too much, he did come out with some exam results in September 2016.

He started college to train as a plumber.      He completed year 1, then in year 2 he was given an opportunity of an apprenticeship, which unfortunately did not continue due to contract issues.   This really upset him and resulted in the first signs of him starting to have issues with his confidence.

In early 2017 we decided it was a good time to move out of Romford so that Lee could start his second year of college in a new area.   We did that and moved to Coggeshall in August '17.

Lee then started to attend Colchester Institute in September 2017.   He nearly got to the end of his course but he was frustrated and struggling with confidence, which led him to giving up the college and leaving just before the end of his last exams.   So he never received his qualifications.

From then on he tried to work hard, finding new jobs in different places, but just a small mishap would make him leave the job.   His last job he started in April 2019 at Millbank.      He really seemed to enjoy it and was really happy when he was given a permanent contract in July '19.

From 2016 to 2019 we had various problems with Lee's mental health.   Finally, in March '19, Lee knew he was struggling, so we suggested he go to the doctors.     He was prescribed some antidepressants, which he started to take and was feeling better in himself, so he decided to stop the medication, stating that he was not depressed and so he didn't need them.

Lee then declined again in June '19.      He declined terribly, which resulted in him referring himself to The Lakes.   He spent four days in there and was diagnosed with emotional unstable personality disorder.      He came out of hospital feeling optimistic and very positive.

When Lee was released from hospital, he was handed over to the community team and was told they would be contacting him to allocate him with a key worker within two weeks who would be able to find him help and therapy, and the therapy he needed to learn the skills he needed to cope with the way his head worked.

I chased Essex Partnership University Trust on several occasions over the next three months but no contact to Lee was ever made by them.

Lee had spent the week before he died staying at his friend's house as the boy's parents were away on holiday.   They worked together and had taken the week off as annual leave.   I spoke to Lee every day. I remember that he enjoyed himself playing on quad bikes and chilling out.

Lee then came home on the Thursday evening and spent the weekend relaxed and chilled, and ready to go back to work on Tuesday morning.

On Tuesday morning, I found that Lee was not in his bed when I woke up to go and check on him.    I kept calling his phone to find out where he was.    The worst call ever came around 8.30 on 27 August '19 when the police officer asked to come to my house.    My heart shattered there and then.   I knew we'd lost him.

My relationship with Lee was always close.     He was my baby boy.   Through his teenage years we had a bond, no matter what.

*(Pause)*

**Ms Stokes**: No matter what was happening around us, with all the stresses we had, we always checked in on each other.     He also had a good relationship with Gary, his stepdad.     We got married in 2016, having been together since 2014. They were always friends and he never tried to be a dad to him.    He shared everything with me, sometimes too much, but I preferred that.   There was no surprises when his friends tell me stories about the things they got up to.   We were especially close in the final two years, when Charlie and Ben had both left home, so we had more time alone at home.    I miss him.

Our family will never recover from losing Lee.   Not an hour goes by without his name going through my head. I cry nearly every day, just about silly things that he should be here for.

*(Pause)*

**Ms Stokes**: Every time there's an event, I think he should be with us.    He has missed out on all the stepping stones of his nieces and nephews growing up, his friends and his family, life events, and just life.      He should be here with us.

Lee has left a massive mark in all of the people that he met in his life, and I don't think it will ever be the same without him.    Lee is thought about every single day and we really wish he could have seen how many people were there for him.      There were over 300 people at his funeral, and countless people that had the pleasure of knowing him.    Whenever we are out and bump into people that he knew before he passed, or only -- sorry.    Whenever we are out and bump into people that he knew before he passed or only just met him, they always have a funny story to tell about him.   His memory will live on forever.   He was one in a million.   I just wish he knew that.

**Mr Griffin**: Could you put up the remaining photographs, please.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the final photograph.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much for telling us about Lee. Thank you so much.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you.

Chair, we'll just rearrange the table.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: May I invite Lynne to go to the table.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, we hear now from Lynne Breaker-Rolfe.    She'll give her commemorative account about her husband, Roy Breaker-Rolfe, and she's accompanied at the table about her legal representative, Agata Usewicz.

On the table we have framed photographs, one is of Roy and the other is of Roy again with his grandchildren, his daughter's children.    And I invite Lynne to start when she's ready.

Statement by Lynne Breaker-Rolfe about Roy Breaker-Rolfe
--------------------------------------------------------

**Mrs Breaker-Rolfe**: Roy, my husband, was born at Fanners Green near Chelmsford, and then when he was about four moved to Broads Green near Chelmsford.

Roy had a great childhood, being outside most of the time with his friends, roaming in the fields, looking for wildlife, scrumping for apples, getting up to mischief, but all good fun.   Roy had a few pets, guinea pigs, and once brought home a puppy, which he was allowed to keep.

Roy used to love to go to Suffolk to see his grandparents who lived on a farm, again a lot of wildlife, going out with his uncles across the fields.

Roy's other grandparents had a small holding where he and his friend used to cycle over to help and see to the animals.

School was not a very happy time, being an undiagnosed dyslexic made some lessons difficult. However, when Roy left school he went to Writtle agricultural college where he gained qualifications in animal husbandry and general farming.   Considering his dyslexia, this was something he was very proud of.   This was something he was interested in and went to work on a local farm, which he really did enjoy.

I met Roy one Sunday when I was out driving around with my friend and we stopped in a café for a drink. Roy was there and we immediately liked the look of each other and found we had a lot in common.     Roy was a good-looking boy, he had a great big, lovely smile, quiet, and drove his beloved American Pontiac Firebird car with an amazing hooter.

One of my most memorable moments was when I first met Roy, we really did fall in love with each other that day.    And we never looked back.   A few days after we met, he told his sister he was going to marry me, and he did.

We soon became girlfriend and boyfriend, spending all our evenings and spare time together.      We then decided we would get married after about a year.       We then went on to have two children, a daughter Lynette and son Byron.

Roy was a lovely father to his children.    We used to have a lot of caravan holidays as we had a touring caravan, so had many good times away in various places in the UK.    We always had dogs that were very special to Roy.    They always came on holiday with us.      Christmas was a special time, us four together playing board games, which Roy and Byron always used to cheat at, much to Lynette's dismay.    We used to go to country fairs a lot, showing our dogs and just enjoying the different events of the day.    It was a happy time.

We used to visit Roy's parents most Saturdays, always having the same lunch, which the kids thought was just great.    We might then play cards or games in the early evening leaving with the kids in their pyjamas ready for bed at home.

Roy was a loving and generous son.    He was always drop everything to help his father with anything he needed doing, which he carried on after his father passed away, always helping his mother with the garden and bits on the house.    Roy loved his parents very much.

Roy was also a landscape gardener.    When the children were young, Byron used to go with his dad to work a lot, which they both enjoyed.       But when the children were older, his real passion was renovating property.     We would buy a derelict property, live in our caravan while we got it ready to live in and then sell on.   Roy renovated about 15 properties over the years. He was self-taught and gained so much knowledge over the years, it was truly amazing.    We worked on the properties together, and these times are now very special memories of us being together all the time.

Roy's main hobby was Formula 1 racing.    He always watched the races with Byron.    There was always conflict over who was the best and should win, but it was all good fun.

His other interest was his pets, particularly the dogs, who he was amazing with, and they all loved him. We also have a parrot, Jasper.    We had many a laugh listening to what Roy and Byron had taught Jasper to say, some not so repeatable.     Jasper still speaks in Roy's voice now telling the dogs to stop barking and so on.   On occasions it catches me out, as it's like he is in the room.

Roy was always the first one along with our grandson in the sea, even in winter they paddled.    Roy loved to be beside the sea at any time of year.     We always went somewhere every weekend, country or coast, all over the country, so there are not many places we have not been to, and again I have those great memories of those times spent together.

One of our most memorable Christmases was spent in Goathland, North Yorkshire.    We arrived on Christmas Eve, went to church for a candlelight carol service.    When we came out it had been snowing.   It snowed all night and was about 4 foot of snow.      The ploughs were out.    Roy was in his element, playing in the snow with the dogs and kids, helping people who needed a tow out.    That time will always remain one of the happiest in my memory.

Roy had a happy personality.     He was loyal, kind and generous.    Family meant a lot to him, spending as much time as he could with the family.     It was also very rare to see Roy down in the dumps.     It would be something major to see him like that.     Always pleased to see our friends, parents and his sisters.     He was the sort of person you cannot stay mad at very long, things were soon back to normal, with no grudges held.

As Roy got a bit older his anxiety became more apparent, so we adjusted our life to make him feel more secure.     I believe this began after his father passed away.     He then had a very good friend pass away and his brother-in-law, all in a short space of time.     This all took some time to come to terms with, which resulted in poor sleep and depression.      Roy's condition deteriorated hugely over the last year of his life, trying to take his own life several times.

The last few years, we, I asked for help many times from various hospitals.      No one listened to what I had to tell them, they just took what Roy said as truth. They could not even recognise a mental health crisis and just bumped Roy into A&E on his own.     At no time did anyone listen.    In the end, he was sent to hospital in Norfolk that now just works for the NHS taking mental health patients.    I had no information on him or what had happened when Roy arrived there about 10.30 pm, no one bothered to listen to what I had to say, instead taking the word of a paranoid psychotic person who only a few hours ago could not even speak.

There was no help out there for him.     This was particularly distressing to our family as we were the ones trying to look after him, which was not an easy task never knowing where Roy was or what he was doing. The NHS failed Roy and failed our family in the worst possible way.

*(Pause)*

**Mrs Breaker-Rolfe**: Roy passed away 21 February 2021.    He was 63.    This was unexpected and has had a massive impact on all our family.     Our future plans for retirement have now all disappeared, my life completely changed in a heartbeat. I am a different person and cannot still believe what’s happened.

Lynette and Byron are equally distraught at losing their dad.    They both find it so hard to talk about what happened, as the terrible last 18 months of his life overclouded all the good memories.     In the very odd conversations we have about their dad, it always ends in tears, so sometimes the subject is changed as it is too painful to remember he is still not here.    Byron still cannot get used to it only being me when I visit, as he's used to us always going everywhere together and still expects to be both of us.

Roy and I lived and worked together.   We were always with each other, enjoying each other's company nearly 24 hours a day, and that was how we liked to live.    We had many plans for the future.    Roy loved life and his family.    Roy's elderly mother has found his passing very difficult to come to terms with and understand and, of course, it was a terrible shock to her, his sisters and extended family and our friends who miss him also.

I know Roy would like to be remembered to be the kind, loyal, generous person he was.   Roy would not want to be remembered for his illness, but what he was like before he became ill: fun-loving, kind, loyal, he is the love of my life, my best friend, he always will be and never will be forgotten.

I also wanted to share some memories and thoughts of Roy from friends and family, so I have included these.

**Ms Usewicz**: This is from Barbara and Ron, who are friends.

We've known Lynne and Roy a very long time, way back to when we had our sons within six months of each other 40 years ago.    I remember when Byron, their son, was born and how excited Roy was as he gave us the news when Lynne had given birth.   Their family was complete. Lynette and Byron were truly loved and cherished and had a great childhood with Lynne and Roy.

Roy had the kindest soul, would help anyone out and he absolutely adored Lynne.   She encouraged him to have the confidence to do anything he wanted to succeed in life, which is how they came to start buying and renovating properties.   He was good at it and it helped his mental health to have something manual to get stuck into.

We noticed a few years ago that Roy seemed more nervous and anxious for some reason.    Of course we now know he got quite bad, but at the time he tried to hide it from everyone, except his close family, as he was worried about admitting it, somehow feeling ashamed of it, as other people would not understand the nature of the illness.

However, we would get together every few weeks for lunch or barbecues in the summer and had some really good times.    He was a great joker and liked to tell us funny stories.   When Lynne had broken her ankle badly and was very immobile for a year, he looked after her. And they had just started to renovate another house but he managed that and was doing all of Lynne's care at the same time.    He was just a lovely man who lived for his family.

He loved his grandchildren and spending time with them and he was a great animal lover.    They were never without a dog and used to walk the dogs for miles across the fields where they lived.

Roy and Lynne loved to travel around the country seeing different places and just loved to be together.

Accepting that Roy was driven to suicide has been so hard for all his family and friends and, of course, his wife Lynne.   She says she constantly feels guilt that she could not help him enough, but she has tried every avenue she could to get him some help.    And, of course, she could not confide in us about what was going on with Roy's mental health as he did not want anyone to know that he was not coping.     He was the love of her life. They were soulmates.   The impact on her has been enormous, the life they had planned and saved for in retirement has been ripped away and I know that she feels she has no proper purpose in life herself now.

If it was not for her son, his wife and her daughter, I really believe that she might take the same path as Roy, but she would not want her family and friends to go through what she has had to experience, so she tries to be brave and carry on, but I know that every day is a struggle without Roy.     I hope that in the future she will manage to find some peace and know that everyone around her is so proud of how she's actually managing to function, even though what happened with Roy is constantly playing like a video on repeat in her head, and I know that at last Roy's pain has gone and that one day he will meet Lynne again and they will be together again at last.      RIP Roy.

Then this is from Dena, her friend.

Roy and Lynne had a very special connection and love.   I often said I have never seen another couple who are so truly devoted to each other.     Not many people are lucky enough to experience this true connection and have such an amazing bond and love with someone as they did.

I feel so very lucky and honoured that I had the great pleasure of having both you, Lynne, and Roy in my life.   You both became my friends after Lynne came to work for me with my children's nurseries.    They became friends first and foremost.     Above all else, please know the huge admiration I have for Roy in so many ways, not only a friend, but Roy used to tend my garden and keep it nice and neat.    It took me a long time to let another person tend the garden.

He loved my coffee bean machine, I always had a cup waiting for him.    The machine starts on its own sometimes now, I'm sure it's him nudging me for a coffee.

Roy became a very valued friend and someone who came to help me out when it was needed.   An instance is one year when we had snow and I was struggling to get some salt to take to my children's nursery to put down in the car park as it was iced over.   Roy immediately came to my rescue telling me to stay at home, he would go and get the salt and lay it, which he did.

My dog, Peanut, absolutely adored Roy.     Peanut got very excited when he saw Roy as he knew it was playtime and a walk.    Roy was without doubt one of Peanut's favourite people of all time.   He was kind and understanding to both my pets, Peanut and Belle the cat.

Roy would at the drop of a hat take Peanut home for the weekend if I needed to be somewhere, which was so much enjoyment for him, as Lynne and Roy always went out on a journey at the weekends taking Peanut with him, stopping at the pub for lunch, and then they all enjoyed a nice walk.

I can only imagine the hell that Lynne is going through trying to deal with the loss of someone who was her whole world.   Words cannot come close to helping or supporting Lynne through this difficult time.     Roy was a very special person who will be always be in his family's hearts.   His light will always continue to shine.   To all those who knew him through treasured memories these will live on and never fade.

With much love to Roy, Lynne and family.

And then we have an account from Lynette, Roy's daughter.

My dad was a happy person, who loved to joke around. He told me many tricks he used to play on my poor nan growing up.     I could not have asked for anything more, as you gave me your time, love and support growing up. You were the best dad.    We would play a lot of games when we were children which he always had to win, and he always did as he would cheat, which used to cause an argument.

Dad used to take us all out on days out.    He always made sure it was a fun and full day of exploring.       The earliest one I can remember, he took us to London for the day.    Dad drove, and he took us to all the sites. It was a great day, I still have the photos.

Also we went on lots of holidays.    We all liked going to Cornwall, exploring the beaches and caves and castle trips.    In the boat on the boating lake, dad rocking the boat so I was scared I would fall in.       He always played tricks on us.

Dad was really proud of my three sons, his grandsons Josh, Callum and Owen.    He used to call in on his way home from work when the boys were young to see us, and we spent hours in McDonald's in the play area.    We used to meet at my nan's, then walk up to the woods so the boys could make a den.    We then had a picnic.    My dad loved to do this with my boys.    The boys were always excited on going on these trips.

I have lots and lots of good memories of holidays, days out.     We used to visit my nan and grandad's every Saturday.    There was a lot of nice memories made on those days, playing games, helping my nan with the dinner.

I cannot find the words to say how much my dad is missed.     There is nothing that can fill that hole.   My dad passing away has left us all devastated.      We will always love and miss him.    He will never be forgotten. He was such a big part of my life.

I miss you, dad.    With lots of love, Lynette.

This is the final statement.

This is my statement to tell you just how lovely Roy Breaker-Rolfe was, by Marie Findlay, his daughter-in-law.

I honestly don't know where to begin or how to put into words how much of a hole in our hearts there is. I have been with Roy's son for nearly 21 years and we have two wonderful children aged 13 and 15, so I knew Roy for 18 years and heard lots of wonderful stories of Byron and his dad.

Byron isn't able to write this statement because he can't even say the words that his dad has died.       It's raw since the day, nothing will heal him.

When growing up, Byron told me he spent so much time with his dad.   Byron struggled and school was an issue for him and social anxiety, so his dad supported him and took him to work with him some days.    He was taught so many life skills and had his dogs by his side.    He tells me he had the best childhood, and being with his dad got him through it all.

Roy was such a hands-on person and had so many skills when it came to gardening, building skills and working on cars.   All of these were taught to Byron and now he can take his hand to most things.    They bonded so much, spending all that extra time together and working on projects together.

There were so many stories of him messing around and playing jokes, so laid-back and a family man.     Since I have known him, I can say the same.   Every time we went round to their house, Byron would be warned not to start or mess around and wind us up.    Lynne would say the same to Roy, because we knew what we were like when they got together.    This never lasted, and within minutes they'd be messing around and making jokes.      Roy would always find the sweets and chocolates before dinner, and keep asking when dinner's ready, both pretending that they're starving.    Then, when my boys grew up, our youngest would join in too.    We joked that you could tell that they were Breaker-Rolfes, they were just like peas in a pod.

We used to laugh so much, and Christmas times were fun, playing games, and Roy always cheated at games.      He didn't like to lose, even against the kids.    So competitive, but in a fun way.   He was like a little child around his grandchildren and loved playing with them.   I remember one Christmas we played beer pong.     We didn't have beer so I think it was vodka or gin.    But, because of their competitiveness, Byron and Roy both wanted to win, but all they won were headaches.

On days out he was the first to offer treats to his grandkids and always pulled out a handful of change.      No matter what, he had cash all the time.    The boys always knew to go up to grandad because he was such a softy with them and loved spoiling them.

One holiday we all went to Norfolk and hired a boat for the day.   I remember Roy was the first to drive it, all excited.   All four boys loved it and they were in their element together, while me and Lynne sat at the back watching.   Such an amazing day.

When we were at the beach, it was Roy who took the kids into the sea for the first time.    Our son was in his element with his boogie board and grandad taking him out so far, he thought it was amazing.

Roy had this huge love of all animals.     He would take in any wild animals that were injured and nurse them back to health.    This had passed on through the generations.    I have been told so many stories of how they helped ducks, partridges, birds and anything that needed help.    They also had dogs their whole life and he was so committed to them.     They lived the best life, going to work with him every day.    Byron had pet rats, finches, ferrets, et cetera, and since we got together this has all passed to me and we have our own little zoo now.

About five years ago I was messaged and asked to take on some abandoned chickens, and it was Roy who convinced us.     He loved coming to see our pets too, and we have their African grey parrot living us with, Jasper, so we still hear Roy's voice every day through him.     He was taught to burp and make funny noises, as well as so much more.     When Lynne leaves our house, he always says "See you later" in Roy's voice.     It's lovely to still hear him and the humour that was always there.

Heaven gained an angel in Roy, a much loved and missed dad and grandad.

**Mr Griffin**: Could you play the short video, please.

*(Video played)*

**Mr Griffin**: And could you put up the photographs.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the final photograph.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much for sharing that account, Mrs Breaker-Rolfe.     Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that's the last account for this morning, so can we reconvene at 2 o'clock, please.

**The Chair**: 2 o'clock.

*(12.00 pm)*

*(The short adjournment)*

*(2.02 pm)*

**Mr Griffin**: The next commemorative statement will be given by Lisa Morris, and it's about her son, Benjamin Morris, or Ben.    May I ask that the photo is put up, please.

*(Photograph shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: And, Lisa, please start whenever you're ready.

Statement by Lisa Morris about Ben Morris
-----------------------------------------

**Ms Morris**: Thank you.

Ben was just 20 years old and a voluntary inpatient at the Linden Centre in Chelmsford when he died.     Just a few months before Ben was admitted into the Linden Centre, he had finally been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ADHD.    He possibly also had temporal lobe epilepsy.

ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by executive dysfunction occasioning symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, impulsivity and emotional disregulation that are excessive and pervasive.

Looking back now, I can see that Ben had so many of the symptoms of ADHD, which include being unable to sit still, especially in quiet and calm surroundings, acting without thinking, little or no sense of danger -- Ben had none -- being unable to wait their turn, having difficulty organising tasks, being unable to stick to tasks that are tedious or time-consuming, and appearing to be unable to listen to or carry out instructions.

As is known, the symptoms can cause significant problems in life such as underachievement at school, poor social interaction with other children and adults, and problems with discipline.   As is stated on an NHS website:

"Living with ADHD can be difficult as the symptoms can make everyday activities more of a challenge.     It is important to get the support you need to understand and cope with your own child's condition.   The impulsive, fearless and chaotic behaviours typically of ADHD can make everyday activities exhausting and stressful." [As read]

Despite having all these symptoms, and more, from a young age, Ben was never assessed, so this diagnosis was missed.   Ben saw so many doctors and specialists, but unfortunately he was turned away on every occasion with a diagnosis of bad behaviour, a bit of a chip on his shoulder, and I was also told he needs a bit of anger management.

I recall that during one of the appointments I attended with Ben, when he was crying out for help, he was asked about his financial situation.    When Ben explained that he was struggling financially because he was finding it hard to manage or cope with his symptoms and to get a job, he was told that if he was looking for a diagnosis just so he could claim benefits, then that wasn't going to happen.     I saw how crushed Ben was by this response.   He was trying to get help with his condition, not with benefits.

Ben was admitted into the Linden Centre on 8 December 2008.    As a family, we were initially relieved as we believed that finally Ben would now get a proper diagnosis and the help and treatment that he needed so desperately and had waited for for so long.

Sadly, this wasn't to be.     Ben's physical and mental health deteriorated rapidly.     He lost a lot of weight and always seemed very heavily medicated.    He died 20 days later whilst under the care of North Essex Partnership Trust, known now as Essex Partnership University NHS Trust, EPUT.

On 29 December, around 9 am, the doorbell rang.    Two police officers were standing at my door.    Their demeanour was quite cold and felt quite hostile.     They asked me to confirm my name, and when I did, they asked if they could come in.    Once they were in the lounge, they told me that my son Ben had been found dead in his room around 9 pm the night before.     They delivered this news in a very cold and pragmatic manner.    They did not offer any condolences or say anything that might be constructed as kind or sympathetic.    They said that that was all they could tell me, and that I would be hearing from the Coroner's Office.     My legs just gave way, and my partner, then, had to catch me.     The two police officers just left.

I felt like something had physically hit me, and so hard that I thought I had died too.    The instant pain, shock and disbelief was so intense.    Then the question: how?    It was screaming in my head: how could this be when staff had told me just half an hour before the time Ben had been found that they were watching him closely while he was waiting for the doctor to come, as he had been asked to be discharged?

I can't begin to describe the severity of the pain, hearing that my beautiful boy, just 20 years old, had been found dead in his room.   He was in hospital, which I thought was the safest place he could possibly be.

I felt like I had woken up in a different world and that I could never ever go back to my old one. I couldn't sleep, I couldn't eat, and I even felt as though I could not breathe properly.    I was physically sick every day, sometimes several times a day, for around four years after Ben died.   Even now, although the pain is somewhat dulled, remembering the circumstances surrounding his premature death is a daily torture that I don't think I will ever be free from. I still suffer now from horrific nightmares.

Ben was the most beautiful, healthy and happy baby. He had hair like silk, the biggest brown eyes, and eyelashes like feathers.    He was so full of life and so full of fun.   His smile, along with his beautiful white teeth, would make my heart flip.

He had so many plans for his life.    He wanted to be a personal trainer, and he loved boxing, as he said it helped him cope with how he was feeling.   Ben truly was one in a million, and my life will never be the same without him in it.

I'm so proud of Ben.    He never gave up, he never gave in, and he never sat around feeling sorry for himself.   He was determined, with or without help, to beat this. Every day I wonder how Ben's life would be if he was still here today.    I'm sure it would have been so different for him if he had only been properly diagnosed and given the right care and treatment. Ben leaves a beautiful daughter who was just two and a half when he died.    He was an amazing dad and he loved her with all his heart.      They had a very special bond, always laughing and always dancing together.     Like any dad, he wanted to give her the world and the best life he possibly could. Ben had so much to live for and so much to look forward to.    His death was premature, unnecessary and preventable. I'd like to share this poem, because it describes so well what it was like to live in Ben's world: "Take my hand and come with me, I want to teach you about ADHD. I need you to know, I want to explain, I have a very different brain. Sights, sounds, and thoughts collide. What to do first?     I can't decide. Please understand I'm not to blame, I just can't process things the same. Take my hand and walk with me. Let me show you about ADHD. I try to behave, I want to be good, But I sometimes forget to do as I should. Walk with me and wear my shoes, You'll see it's not the way I'd choose. I do know what I'm supposed to do, But my brain is slow getting the message through. Take my hand and talk with me, I want to tell you about ADHD. I rarely think before I talk, I often run when I should walk. It's hard to get my school work done, My thoughts are outside having fun. I never know just where to start, I think with my feelings and I see with my heart. Take my hand and stand with me. I need you to know about ADHD. It's hard to explain but I want you to know, I can't help letting my feelings show. Sometimes I'm angry, jealous or sad. I feel overwhelmed, frustrated and mad. I can't concentrate and I lose all my stuff. I try really hard but it's never enough. Take my hand and learn with me, We need to know more about ADHD. I worry a lot about getting things wrong, Everything I do takes twice as long. Everyday is exhausting for me ... Looking through the fog of ADHD. I'm often so misunderstood, I would change in a heartbeat if I could. Take my hand and listen to me, I want to share a secret about ADHD. I want you to know there is more to me. I'm not defined by it, you see. I'm sensitive, kind and lots of fun. I'm blamed for things I haven't done. I'm the loyalist friend you'll ever know, I just need a chance to let it show. Take my hand and look at me, Just forget about the ADHD. I have real feelings just like you. The love in my heart is just as true. I may have a brain that can never rest, But please understand I'm doing my best. I want you to know, I need you to see, I'm more than the label, I am still me."

**Mr Griffin**: Would you put up the further photographs, please.

*(Photographs shown)*

**Mr Griffin**: That's the final photograph.

**The Chair**: Thank you so much, Ms Morris.

**Ms Morris**: Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Thank you very much. We'll just set up the table for our next account.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: Is the speaker on the table?    May I ask Ralph to come up to the table.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Griffin**: We will hear now Ralph Taylor give his commemorative account about his wife, Carol Taylor.     He's accompanied by his legal representative, Dr Achas Burin. May I just ask, Ralph, can you hear me all right?

**Mr Taylor**: I'm hearing you well, thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: We've put up a photograph.   Please start whenever you feel comfortable to do so.

**Mr Taylor**: Yes.   I'll start now, then, shall I?

**The Chair**: Please do.

Statement by Ralph Taylor about Carol Ann Taylor
------------------------------------------------

**Mr Taylor**: Carol was a much loved wife, mother, grandmother, sister, aunt, cousin, friend and teacher, who was gifted in so many crafts and touched so many lives so positively.    I, Ralph, as her widower, am making this informal statement in relation to her life, and it's poignant that the first day of this Inquiry, 9 September 2024, would have been Carol and my golden wedding anniversary.

Carol was born in Barts Hospital on 25 March 1948, the first child of Harry and Sylvia King and the eldest of three, John and Sharon followed.    The family lived in the area around Great Ormond Street Hospital during her happy childhood.    Her lifelong friend, Susan, recalls:

"I have lots of very happy memories of my childhood with Carol.    Our nans lived in the same house, and we were always together.    We went to St Leonard's Nursery in Corams Fields.     Carol had the peg with the picture of the doll on it and I had the teddy bear.     I remember always wanting the doll.     One day Carol and I were chasing each other around the cloakroom.     I fell and hit my head and a massive egg-like bump came up on my forehead.     I was crying, Carol was crying, we couldn't be consoled and our mums had to come and pick us up."

Susan also records that:

"We went to Saturday morning pictures and were the King's Cross Grenadiers, if you got up on stage and sang before the film you got a big bag of sweets.    Carol and I would get up every week and sing April Love until they got fed up with us, called us over one day and said we had to give someone else a chance, so Century King's Cross lost its two best singers."

Carol had a happy childhood, although her parents remarked that she was always strong-willed.     She went to Haverstock comprehensive school and was in the grammar stream.   She didn't achieve the academic results that she might have done, possibly because she was anxious about being tested in any circumstance, which later included taking her driving test, which she passed on the fourth attempt.   However, she persuaded her father to buy a typewriter on which she self-taught herself touch typing so as to expand her employment opportunities.   She was always self-driven, believing that you can achieve anything you put your mind to.

Her first job on leaving school was working in a bookshop near the British Museum, where she combined serving in the shop with working in the office.    She gave most of her first pay packet to her mother, who was a skilled dressmaker, and asked that she have her clothes made so that she had an individual style.

After a number of typing jobs, Carol started working as a secretary in a solicitor's office, which is where we met.   I was a young rather naive newly qualified solicitor and noticed a pretty secretary wearing an intriguingly short crochet dress.     We sometimes chatted, and although she didn't work for me specifically, she sometimes did if I was busy.    One day she handed me a bill for the work she had carried out, the price of which was a drink after work.    I took her for that drink, and we immediately hit it off, and within five months of our first date we bought and moved into a house together, an early example of Carol being impulsive and getting what she wanted.

I was swept off my feet.    Looking back, the true cost of that bill was substantially more, but it was worth paying every penny.

Our relationship was based on mutual attraction and strong shared family values, influenced by her parents, whom she adored, and my own, all of whom were in time able to celebrate their respective golden wedding anniversaries with us.   From this foundation came our own children, David, Ann and Jane.

Carol's working life was put on hold until Jane was about two.   Carol thought about becoming a teacher.     She went to enquire, at what was then North-East London Polytechnic, what qualifications she would require, but was told that as a mature student she could be immediately accepted.

Leaving Jane at nursery school, she cycled to college to study and blossomed in that environment. After she graduated, she then embarked on an unbelievable career within teaching, a career that took her from a class teacher at Becontree Heath and other schools via a deputy headship at Cleveland School to a headship at the Leys School, Dagenham, all within ten years of graduation.

Carol's friend Linda, a fellow teacher, comments in relation to her headship that Carol was very popular with the staff, parents and children.    She completely transformed the school, creating a wonderful stimulating learning environment for the children.    She was really involved with the pupils, spending as much time as possible in class, and leading them in drama and singing, as well as extending their knowledge of the environment.   Out of her own pocket, she bought a variety of animals, including hamsters, guinea pigs, snakes and insects, so that the children could experience caring for them.

Initially, during the holidays, these animals had to be kept at home, and Jane remembers trying to recover the escaping stick insects.   Carol was responsible for overseeing and managing the expansion of the school from a nursery/infant school to a full junior one, all the time spending as much time with children as possible and leaving administration matters to be done outside teaching term times.

Alongside her teaching career, Carol was a mother, primarily responsible for rearing and guiding and leading our children during their own childhood and schooling.   One main advantage of her being a teacher was in the school holidays where she devoted more time to them.

Overall as a family we tried to involve our children in activities such as cubs, scouts, brownies, guides, dancing, gymnastics and fishing clubs.   Carol was a cub leader.    And, as a family, we travelled to Denmark on an exchange visit for Ann's gymnastic club.

Pets were always part of our family life, with a succession of cats over the years, rabbits, guinea pigs, gerbils, hamsters, birds, tortoises, terrapins, fish and latterly dogs.

We enjoyed regular visits to parks, museums and zoos as well as family holidays, initially in my parents' caravan in Pevensey Bay, and then renting out cottages in Devon, Cornwall and Pembrokeshire, until the vagaries of the British weather tempted us further afield.

The wider family were very much in our lives, centring around our parents, and including siblings and subsequently their partners and children, and Carol was pivotal in this.   For many years she and I hosted family gatherings, particularly around Christmas, where attendance at the Boxing Day lunches increased in size year by year.   They are still remembered by the wider family, and in recent years Jane has taken over the role of hosting the Boxing Day lunches.

After Carol retired from teaching, she wondered what she might do, and I told her to enjoy the benefits of the grandchildren when they came along, which they did like buses, with Lauren, Alex, Angelique, Miles and Scarlett being born within five years.   Carol doted on them and loved to see them whenever she could, nanny Carol sitting with them encouraging them to express themselves, creating artwork together, and never being critical of their efforts, although they understood there were boundaries not to be crossed.   They could and did have fun and for five consecutive years we took all five of them with us to Centre Parcs for a week, where activities were facilitated, shared and enjoyed.

One day after reading -- sorry, one day after watching the film Mamma Mia, Carol decided to emulate the character played by Julie Walters, by climbing on the table to sing "If You Change Your Mind" and nearly falling off, providing a memorable experience.

During this time, Carol developed her skills in arts and crafts, initially holding classes herself from home. When we moved to Buckhurst Hill, she joined classes for pottery, at which she excelled, as well as china painting, mosaics, découpage, knitting, crocheting and jewellery making.

There were also Carol's collecting skills about which there was something almost obsessional.    Most people start a collection with one or two items.     Not Carol.   Whether it be ducks on the wall, Toby jugs or dolls' houses, there had to be a more or less complete set immediately.    Once complete, the collection might be retained or passed on to our friend David for him to sell in his antique shop, and another collection started.

When as a family we met with a celebrant for Carol's funeral and he asked what interests she had, he was deluged with widespread and varied examples like rabbits being pulled out of a bottomless hat.   Carol had been in the St John's Ambulance Brigade as a teacher, was an accomplished cook, trained in cordon bleu cooking, who enjoyed hosting dinner parties, she sang in an adult choir, kept bees and made honey, tried to play the piano -- three pianos purchased and sold -- tried playing the guitar, was a parish councillor, member of both the National Trust and the RHS.    We regularly visited the theatre, ballet, cinema and restaurants together.

We travelled widely, to the USA a number of times, Thailand, Goa, South Africa, Singapore and throughout Europe.     In Singapore, Carol accompanied me four times on business trips, mostly staying in Raffles Hotel, where she enjoyed the facilities while I worked.

One might wonder how it is possible for one person to have done so much and touched so many lives so positively, but that was Carol.    Her friends variously described her as unforgettable, special, amazing, talented, impulsive, loving and very loyal.

Someone once asked me if I believed in God, and I replied that I did and I was married to her.    Although this was said partly in jest, it was partly true, as in my way I worshipped her.     Without her and my children and grandchildren, my life would have been empty and unfulfilled.    I have to go on, as Carol would have wanted me to do.    I could not do so without the support of my family and friends.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Taylor**: Suffering from mental health issues is cruel.     To the outside world, you may appear normal, but inside your head your thoughts are churning around and logic disappeared.

In 2012/13, Carol had her first serious mental health episode.   She was diagnosed as suffering from recurrent depressive disorder, and after being treated with appropriate medication, her condition stabilised for about ten years.

By November 2022, following a series of joint replacements, which progressively reduced her mobility, and increasingly debilitating associated conditions, Carol's mental health started to be affected.    This worsened during a cruise to Iceland in March 2023 to see the northern lights, which Carol regarded as the trip of a lifetime.    Carol developed pneumonia and had to be taken off the ship in Reykjavík, and to a hospital. There she was also diagnosed with diabetes.     She had to stay in hospital until she could be repatriated by air after three weeks.

On her return, Carol's mental condition steadily deteriorated and she recognised that she needed psychiatric help, which was unfortunately not forthcoming.

On 28 June, frustrated and in despair, she took an overdose of her depression medication.    This was a classic cry for help, as immediately after she took the overdose she telephoned my younger daughter, Jane, to tell her what she had done.     I was in the house at the time and arranged for Carol to be taken to A&E.

She was transferred to St Margaret's Mental Health Unit in early July.   There she proved resistant to treatment, as she had done back in 2013, and had also experienced difficulties in eating and drinking, which resulted in a significant weight loss.    ECT was eventually recommended, but never administered.

My daughter Jane and I visited Carol on the evening of 20 November 2023, when although clearly still unwell physically and mentally, she seemed a little brighter. By the time we left, she had agreed to have her hair cut, which she hadn't had done since she was admitted, and also to have new clothes bought for her, since her existing ones were far too loose, because of weight loss.

We were, therefore, totally shocked to receive a phone call in the early hours of 21 November 2023 that Carol had passed away suddenly and unexpectedly.    The shock seemed to be shared by the staff when my daughters and I came to view Carol's body.    It was only when I read the post-mortem that I became concerned about Carol's death.

Carol's care was entrusted to EPUT.      We as a family considered that EPUT's primary responsibility was to preserve and protect Carol's life, and they appeared to have failed to do this.

The impact of Carol's death has fallen heavily on both family and friends.      I have been deprived of my soulmate of over 50 years.      I was diagnosed with stage 4 melanoma in November 2018.      I didn't expect to be here now.    I have been fortunate to be treated by immunotherapy and to have been cancer-free for over three years.

It is cruelly ironic that as my health has improved over the past few years, Carol's declined.     I believe that Carol would have recovered her physical and mental health, had she received timely and effective treatment.

Carol's children, her grandchildren and wider family have all been deprived of Carol's continuing love, guidance and support.     This is particularly true for those of them who also suffer from mental health conditions and for whom her support was pivotal and irreplaceable.

Carol's death has left a huge and unfillable hole in the lives of so many.

**Mr Griffin**: That's the end of the statement.

**The Chair**: Thank you very much for letting us hear about your remarkable wife.    Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, it's time for our break.    Could we say that we will be back at 3.10.

*(2.38 pm)*

*(A short break)*

*(3.10 pm)*

*(Proceedings delayed)*

*(3.14 pm)*

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: The final account the Inquiry is receiving in this September hearing is from Robert Wade, and it's about his son Richard Wade, and Robert is accompanied today by his wife, Linda, and by his son, Richard's brother.

Could the photograph go up, please, and please start when you're ready.

Statement by Robert Wade about Richard Wade
-------------------------------------------

**Mr Wade**: Okay, thank you very much.

I'm here to speak on behalf of my son, Richard Wade. Richard was born on 13 April 1985 and he died on 21 May 2015.

What I say is in two parts.    The first part shall be the journey that we as a family took to get here, or parts of that, and also some general views on the direction of the Inquiry as we have seen it in our efforts over many years; and the second part shall then be a commemorative statement on my son, Richard.

After much campaigning and following the Public Administration and Constitutional Affairs Committee, PACAC, meeting of 15 October 2019, we were told that a statutory public inquiry into Richard's death would not take place, there being two specific reasons: one, such inquiries do not happen for single numbers; and, two, the problems needed to be more systemic in nature.

With yet further assistance from our MP, James Cartlidge, we secured an independent inquiry into Richard's death following his raising a Friday adjournment debate.   The subject of that debate will most likely come up in evidential sessions of this Inquiry.

Statements already given to this Inquiry show that other families walked a parallel path and likely conjointly grew into the non-statutory Essex Mental Health Independent Inquiry, the specifics of which I neither know nor seek to know.

As a family, we are grateful to the Independent Inquiry for the following: firstly, it allowed Linda, my wife, to give evidence in an informal setting compatible with our nature and, secondly, it allowed my son, given his circumstance, to give evidence at all.

We are also grateful to the staff of this Inquiry for their knowledge of the evidence we have already given, and hope that that evidence has helped inform them as they take on the challenge of further understanding the desperately sad issues that underlie these proceedings.

Ironically, it would seem the Independent Inquiry's inability to meet its terms of reference would later sweep away the aforementioned PACAC reasons blocking a statutory inquiry into death in mental health facilities and allow the weight, if I may, of public opinion and campaigning to bring us here.

The two key facts to emerge from the Independent Inquiry were, one, the number of deaths meeting that Inquiry's terms of reference approached 2,000 and, two, of some 14,000 current and past staff, just a handful had agreed to engage with the Independent Inquiry.

The number of qualifying deaths clearly and terrifyingly overwhelmed the first PACAC constraint of single numbers, but it was the Independent Inquiry's second fact that dispensed with PACAC's second condition.   But why was it systemic?   For a systemic failure, it is necessary to first consider EPUT, or NEPT, the Trusts, as a system, and systems need control to achieve their objectives.

When driving your car, and it drifts to the right, you turn slightly to the left to correct the error. That is negative feedback, and it is an essential element in any stable system, and without it any controlled system will fail.

Mental health is both a profession and a vocation, and each of its practitioners should have the opportunity to raise failings and then contribute to the prevention of their future re-occurrence.   And yet across what is now nearly a quarter of a century, no more than 0.1% of practitioners chose, for whatever reason, to raise their voice at the Independent Inquiry to correct the failings of their chosen career path and provide the negative feedback essential to the prevention of future deaths.

That is systemic failure.

Although the above argument is here applied to internal control, the same argument can be applied to external control bodies.   As a family, we are pleased to see the relevant external control bodies listed within the Terms of Reference of this statutory Inquiry.

Chair, I respectfully submit that the apparent internal and external control failings here considered be matters for your Inquiry, for without a voice for practitioners or a willingness or ability to act by regulators, any satisfactory long-term solution will be difficult if not impossible to achieve, as either will be lacking the negative feedback necessary for effective control and, therefore, the prevention of future deaths.

For negative feedback to work, systems require a set point, a set point against which to measure its errors. For an organisation, the set point is a target.     I shall return to this delicate issue at the conclusion of my commemorative statement.

I shall now begin my commemorative statement.

*(Pause)*

**Mr Wade**: Richard was born early in the morning of 13 April 1985 in Newport, Gwent.    The events of that day are firmly fixed in my memory.     There was a thunderstorm outside, with lightning filling the room with a sharp, clear light and hence my name for him, Electric Blue.

Our second son arrived two years later, and my wife Linda and I set about the joys and challenges of family life.   Richard grew up healthy and strong, with a sharp and agile mind.   His early schooling was successful, with all the accompanying issues to be expected with boys.

Throughout his all too short life, Richard was always keen on sports, and those he could not play he would study.   Chess, football, rugby, tennis, boxing, kickboxing, karate, weight training and cricket.      He just loved sports.

His first major sporting interest was Formula 1. Books, models, Scalextric, magazines, and visits to Grand Prix meetings followed, his hero being Michael Schumacher.    Out of the blue, Richard presented my wife with an invoice for a set of mock racing overalls.   They were in the colours and with the respective sponsorship badges of Michael Schumacher.         He had negotiated their production and price with the supplier.   He was not yet ten.   They were not too expensive, and how can one say no to such enterprise? He looked wonderful.

But Richard's king of sports was cricket. A competent player destined for village green non-league, Richard delivered a truly unique leg spin style.   Where he truly excelled was in the history of the game.   For Christmas 1996 he requested a copy of Wisden's Cricketers' Almanack, a record of every test match for a given year.     That Richard would find such a trove of data interesting was not surprising.       What was surprising was that he methodically set about memorising its contents.

He had discovered the concept of memory palaces, and he decided to build one based on cricket data, amusing anecdotes and film clips.   This continued for over a decade, his long-suffering friends not being allowed to leave his bedroom to play cricket until the latest palace contents were rigorously tested.

I'd like to just drift back to Formula 1 for another anecdote I'd like to slip in that gives a slightly different and not just so studious view of Richard.

As a family we went on holiday to America to take our boys to the much loved Fantasyland in Orlando.      One of the evenings we went out for a meal and a rodeo show to amuse our two boys, and on that trip we met two other families.   We got on well, and so when we got back to our hotel we decided to have a drink and a chat.

It turned out the two gentlemen we were with were also interested in Formula 1, so they asked Richard a question, to which he gave the answer.   They asked him another question, he answered that as well.   Soon the question went on to: who won this?    Who came third?    And he answered all of them.    Not satisfied, the two gentlemen pushed even further, "Well, if you know that much, at a particular race, in a particular year, on a particular lap, who was in this position and who was three places in front of them?"   Richard reeled off the answer.   This went on for some time.    In the end, the two men gave up asking questions and just admitted that he knew what he was talking about.

Later that evening, the other two families departed, and Richard walked back over for a bit more money to go and play on some of the games machines.    So I asked him the question, "Richard, I know that you knew all of the races, the winners' positions, but I didn't realise you'd memorised every lap position for every driver." To which he responded, "I didn't, but I figured they hadn't either."

That pretty much summed up his nature.     He could be fun and he could be funny and he had a roar of a laugh.

Back to cricket.     His friends of cricket that were tested, these friends were true throughout his school days, true through his successes and troubles, and still true after his death.    Each year, a Richard Wade Memorial Cricket Match is held between a Richard Wade select XI, where "select" simply means that you've been chosen, and Leavenheath Cricket Club where Richard and his friends played.   For eight years the match has been a carnival day of competitive cricket.     It is a testament to my wife, Linda and her friends, Richard's friends and the club that so much charitable good has come from such a dreadful death.     But that dark matter is for a later time.

I'd just like to move now to a statement -- a memorial written by one of Richard's friends, Johnny Weavers, that was sent unprovoked to my wife. My wife still communicates with all of Richard's friends, and I would like to read some of it now:

"A little over nine years ago I received a call that's changed my life ever since, informed that my best friend, Richard, R Wade, R the Cat Wade, had sadly taken his own life.     Life hasn't ever been quite as good for me personally and it led me to specialist bereavement counselling in the months after that call.

"The lady that supported me was amazing.     She helped me through a period that I hope nobody else ever has to go through.     It was her suggestion to try to find a way of positively remembering R Wade.

"As soon as she said that, it was obvious that it had to involve cricket, a sport we shared a love for together and a club we'd enjoyed playing at Leavenheath Cricket Club.     Richard's mum, Linda, didn't need any persuading at all and the Richard Wade Memorial Cricket Match was born.    Leavenheath Cricket Club couldn't have been more supporting at accommodating us all.     Linda chose the charity CALM, Campaign Against Living Miserably, and we all agreed this was the perfect cause for us to raise money and awareness."

And my wife has been extremely successful in that regard.

Richard was successful in both his GCSE and A level results.    His undergraduate years were at Warwick University, where he read economics.       Although achieving honours, he never found comfort with his grade, having succumbed to undergraduate life and the rugby team.

I'll drift a little bit again for a moment and make this the last.

Where I say he didn't quite achieve, as he approached his final examinations and he was revising, my wife and I decided to give him a call.      We called him, and he was out.    I asked him the question, "You're out, aren't you revising?"     "No, mum, I needed to have a little bit of relaxation."     "Okay."    But the noise sounded quite odd, so I asked him, "Richard, where are you?"     To which he answered, "Prague."    I said, "Why are you in Prague?"     "I'm on a rugby tour."    That was Richard, you never quite knew what answer you were going to get or what he would do next.

One passion consumed Richard more than any other, reading, and with a vast memory palace at his disposal he would, across many years, absorb the contents of innumerable books.    Today they are displayed in his bedroom, stored in several boxes in my garage, they're filling the bookshelf at his brother's house and given in at least equal numbers to charity shops.

But for all his gifts, Richard had a flaw, and it is that that has brought me here.    After returning from university, Richard met a course friend for a break in London.     To the surprise of my wife and I, that friend brought Richard home.    The friend explained that Richard's mental condition had deteriorated and it was necessary to get him home safely.

Given the unexpected nature of Richard's condition, we were fearful of drugs or some other event that may have brought about this condition.    The friend assured us that nothing untoward had happened in London, and Richard would explain no further.    We thanked the friend for his kindness, and he departed.

Richard was clearly agitated and deeply troubled, but still closed on the matter.    Over the coming days, his mental state worsened and his visit to doctors arranged.     Depression was diagnosed and antidepressants were prescribed, but his mental condition continued to deteriorate.    We were concerned for his mental health and noticed during this time that Richard would pace around a lot.    We also found that he was speaking to himself and telling us that his body felt like it was on fire.   Richard would also cry and continue to be agitated, and was neither resting nor sleeping.

We did discover that the cause of his depression and now profound anxiety was motor neurone disease.     Again, appointments were made with doctors with no hint of motor neurone disease being detected, but Richard's state of mind would not allow for him to accept the diagnosis and his suffering continued.

Richard, before his mental health issues, from a young age was a completely rational person.     However, he'd developed an irrational fear of motor neurone disease.   Any tremor that Richard would have would reinforce his deep fear of motor neurone disease.        It would take us a long time to explain to him in a rational manner that motor neurone disease was not an issue for him.   However, Richard was in a black hole of irrational behaviour that he could not get out of.

We believe that Richard's irrational fear of motor neurone disease probably started at university.     In an attempt to allay Richard's fears we arranged a private consultation with a recognised motor neurone disease specialist.   The consultant concluded that Richard did not have motor neurone disease, adding, "But I do not expect that you will believe me."   He was right, Richard's disease was elsewhere.

Richard's condition moved towards crisis.     When it came, we called for a doctor's home visit, which was granted.   Richard was given a sedative and he slept.   He continued to sleep for weeks, catching up on all that he had lost over the unknown duration of his mental torment.   That single dose of a sedative would prove to be the only effective intervention Richard would ever receive for his mental ill health.

I do not remember the doctor's name, but would belatedly like to thank him for the eight wonderful years he gave Richard.

While Richard was recovering from his sleep deprivation, he was watched over by Linda, his brother, me, uncles, aunts, cousins and friends.   In time, we provided private counselling and he moved towards his recovery and future.

He first decided to return to study, choosing a history master of arts at Essex University.     That was followed by a PhD in politics, earning his doctorate in the minimum time permitted.   Immediately on completing his PhD, Richard embarked on authoring a book on economic policy, published by Palgrave, and this is a copy -- this is one of the proof copies that he gave to us and to his close family.   A truly treasured possession.

To help support himself while researching, Richard lectured in US politics.      He also project managed the launch of a student research journal, and found the time to play rugby for the university, but one achievement left a legacy that is truly reflective of Richard's nature.    I heard the story from an Essex student who studied under Richard, a courteous and gentle man who confessed to restrictive shyness.     The day I heard it was Richard's funeral, a day on which I was to learn so much about my son from those who shared his life.

When Richard inaugurated, selected and trained the -- and led -- the Essex University debating society, he did not see this particular student's shyness as a barrier to success.     The student was recruited, and the effects went well beyond the university.     The ex-student now had his own show on an Asian radio network based in the Midlands.

I would like to say that if you met Richard and you spoke with him, you would have thought differently after that conversation about whatever it was that you spoke about.    A remarkable man.

His studies now being over, Richard turned to the world of work, securing a trainee accountant role with a major international consultancy, intending to specialise in auditing.      All was going well and his life was on the move.   Work and martial arts were his cornerstones in this period.   To stay in touch with some of his school friends a self-imposed challenge was set for he and his friends to visit all 96 of the Football Association's league grounds, the purpose being to rate the meat pies.

Things were going well for Richard, with final qualification as an accountant almost within his grasp. It was at this time that my wife and I started to notice some changes in Richard, followed by the return of some of the troubling symptoms of his earlier encounter with mental illness, anxiety, pacing, insomnia, and a constant need for reassurance.   Richard confessed the return of his irrational fear, motor neurone disease, and once again we trod the path of general practitioners, out-of-hours surgeries, and Accident & Emergency units.

The treatment provided was antidepressants, a long-term approach to the chronic aspects of his mental illness.    What Richard needed was relief from the rapidly accelerating downward spiral of his acute symptoms.   Sleeping tablets were ineffectual.    He had long passed the point of that return.

For two weeks and with much help from family and friends, we coped as best we could, but Richard's direction of travel had long been set.    The rate of his deterioration would only increase and we were incapable of keeping pace.

On the afternoon of 16 May 2015, Richard moved himself into the street outside the family home and refused to re-enter.    My wife and I were physically and mentally exhausted and out of ideas.     We called our younger son, who came home, and we discussed our options while a neighbour oversaw Richard.    Having only one option, we called Suffolk Mental Health Services for an emergency visit.    We thought we were about to welcome respite into our home.   What entered was the prelude to a nightmare.

When the emergency team arrived, Richard absolutely refused to enter his home.    For personal safety reasons, he wanted to be admitted to a mental health institution. Put simply, he was having suicidal thoughts.

As he grew increasingly agitated and fearful of his condition, Richard became ever more desperate.    Perhaps to precipitate a conclusion, perhaps out of confusion at his prolonged suffering, Richard accused me of intending to kill him.   With utter shock and no warning, I found myself being peremptorily questioned for conspiracy to murder my own son.    My police constable interrogator quickly realised the true cause of the accusation.

For a further four hours, Richard was left outside as the temperature dropped, pacing the streets with a police escort.   Tea, sandwiches and warm clothing were all sent out to keep the cold at bay.   Finally, the Trust capitulated and Richard had an admission to a mental health ward as a place of safety at the Linden Centre, Chelmsford.

Richard kissed his mother goodbye, and I being kept apart by events earlier that evening.   He was driven away by Essex police to what we were told and believed to be a place of safety.

Now, there are sections redacted here, and I shall cover that to link to the next part by merely saying that the following day Linda and I went to the Linden Centre, and we were admitted at the time that my son started to take his own life and were on the ward at that time, and witnessed the events surrounding it.

I shall now move on and continue with the rest of my statement.

We were ushered away to a family room.   The enormity of our tragedy was beginning to engulf us.   Despite our repeated requests no information about Richard was forthcoming and staff avoided speaking to us.    With Richard's brother now with us, we moved to join Richard in Accident & Emergency after he had been transferred to hospital.     It was here that the true extent of Richard's condition was beginning to be revealed, and it was following his transfer to an ICU, intensive care unit, that that agonising nail was driven home and hope driven out.

Nothing could have prepared us for what had been done to our son and brother.     Little more than 12 hours before, Richard was physically strong and handsome.       Now his head was swollen with blood, purple red from burst blood vessels and the structure of his eyes breaking down.     On first sight, no one could bear looking at him for more than a few seconds.     It was our family's great misfortune that our beloved Richard should fall victim to the Trust's dangerous practices, as it has been for so many other families.

Given the scale of the suffering caused, there will be no painless solution in righting this Trust and its broader operating environment, if indeed it can survive. For my part, I am willing to give this Inquiry every assistance within my compass in finding that solution. But to get here and make that commitment, my family has suffered greatly.    We've spent too many years fighting to uncover the truth about Richard's death, too many years campaigning to get the people that mattered to listen.     Those years took their toll.

Having changed to an academic career later in life, and being in good health, in 2015 I had many wonderful opportunities and years ahead of me.   On 17 May that year, all my professional ambitions ceased to be. Indeed, they no longer mattered.

The psychological, physical and financial consequences of a loss by suicide are devastating.     At the time when you can least cope, you are confronted by a deluge of enquiries, inquests and probate and through unmanageable trauma you must pore through every detail of a loved one's life to resolve the consequences of their passing.

My recovery, whatever that means, was supported by antidepressants, sleeping tablets and wise guidance, but such crutches can only take you so far.

At some point one's demons must be faced.   Mine were my warmest memories of Richard, and they were there at every turn.   The only way I could find peace was to confront them.   Whatever triggered the memory, a piece of music, a picture, I would listen or look at it until no further tears could flow.   Cleansing in turn each treasured memory of its sorrow was the only way I could find to cope, giving me space to see lost happiness between the sadness.   But everything has its price, and for me the years of unremitting stress have left me with an untreatable heart condition.   But he was my son and I have no regrets for the decisions I have made.

Immediately upon our loss, my wife relinquished her voluntary work with the Citizens Advice Bureau, unable to face another's troubles while embroiled in the tempest of her own sorrows.   It took her two years of counselling and innumerable hours of support of family, friends and doctors to help her cope with her terrible situation.   She too suffered terribly because of the long-term consequences of stress, needing to be admitted to Papworth Hospital with Takotsubo syndrome.     The British Heart Foundation recognises an alternative name, broken heart syndrome, the consequence of her loss being too great to bear.   Yet carry on she must, and I am proud and grateful that she has, my constant companion through my darkest days and a trusted hand in trying to correct my errors.   She is a remarkable woman.

Richard and his brother, allowing for fraternal competition, grew always as the best of friends.        Each was proud of his brother's successes and ready to help when needed.   They played sport together in their youth, and they would later meet every New Year's Eve.     They would discuss the year that had passed and that to come. Richard's loss was devastating to his brother.     Our younger son had to resolve the consequences of his loss while fulfilling his duties without let.   It is a testament to his inner strength that he did so.

At Richard's funeral, his brother, despite his own distress, honoured the coffin at its arrival, led the pallbearers and gave Richard the most touching of eulogies, a eulogy that ended in an epitaph that was both true of Richard's life and likely his future, an extraordinary man.

At his wedding, Richard's brother kept one important seat vacant, that of the best man.   Loyalty and brotherly love decreed that one person and one person only could have the honour of that singular role. Nothing had diminished their friendship.

We have never received a satisfactory explanation of Richard's death from the Trust.   Piecing that story together fell upon us.   It was a long and debilitating journey, a journey that no one should ever have to take again.

With regards to my family's loss, I am not sure what individual justice for Richard would mean, but with the passing of years and with the number of deaths to be considered, I am left with one overriding certainty, the deaths must stop.

And now I shall return and pick up where I left off on my original statement relating to targets.

If the deaths are to stop, what attribute must the Trust display?   There can only be one acceptable target for non-natural deaths: zero.       Any other arbitrary number would be tantamount to a quota, a moral dilemma if ever there were one.        Even beating a national average, however low, would be at least nothing other than accepting worse practice elsewhere.        It must be zero.

All those souls that have been lost scream silently for that change, and is it not deafening?

I thank you.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

**Mr Griffin**: Chair, that's the last account of this September hearing.     We have a further hearing from 25 November to 5 December, and the Inquiry will provide details -- further details about that shortly.

**The Chair**: Thank you.

*(Pause)*

Closing remarks by The Chair
----------------------------

**The Chair**: As we have come to the end of the commemorative accounts, I want to thank everyone who has participated in these hearings.     I'm grateful to those who provided opening statements, both by submitting them in writing and those that were read during the hearing.       All the opening statements were thought-provoking and I, along with the Inquiry team, will carefully consider their contents and the matters of concern which they've raised as we proceed with this Inquiry.

I want to express my deepest gratitude to everyone who gave us commemorative and impact accounts over the past two weeks, whether that was by reading that account, by allowing the account to be read by someone else, or by sharing photographs and videos.   I know how difficult and emotionally challenging it must have been to contribute to these hearings, and I really appreciate the courage and effort it will have taken to gather up precious memories, both happy and the more distressing ones, and to share them in such a public forum.

All accounts were provided with grace and candour, and they have certainly made a lasting impression on me and on the whole of the Inquiry team.

It's important, I think, that we at all times keep in our minds the real people and their families who experienced the mental health inpatient services that we're concerned with.   The commemorative accounts will certainly help us to do that, and I thank you all for them.

*(3.53 pm)*

*(The hearing adjourned until Monday, 25 November 2024)*

